.N.D 


OOK 


m&m 


;co 


[RLE  CLASSES 


PRIVAIE  STUDENTS. 


THE  SHORTER  CATECHISM  | 


/*^  -.       .    —^  -^  - 

CLARK 


LIBRARY 


TORONTO 


Shelf  No.J5sXa.lfc3  ...VIC  ^ 


Register  No 


19. 


I 


tor  BifcU  Classes 
anti  ^vitiate  i 


EDITED    BY 

REV.    MARCUS    DODS,    D.D., 

AND 

REV.    ALEXANDER    WHYTE,    D.D. 


IN  PREPARATION. 
THE  BOOK  OF  PSALMS.     By  Rev.  Professor  BINNIE,  D.D.,  Aberdeen. 

THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.     By  Rev.  GEORGE  REITH, 
M.A.,  Glasgow. 

THE  BOOK  OF  ACTS.     By  Rev.  GEORGE  WEBSTER  THOMSON,  M.A., 
Aberdeen. 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO   THE  CORINTHIANS.      By  Rev.   MARCUS 
DODS,  D.D.,  Glasgow. 

THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.      By   Rev.   JAMES  MELLIS, 
M.A.,  Southport. 

THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.     By  Rev.  SIMEON  R.  MACPHAIL, 
M.A.,  Liverpool. 

THE  EPISTLES  OF  ST.  JOHN.      By  Rev.  Professor  SALMOND,  D.D., 
Aberdeen. 

CHURCH  AND  STATE.     By  A.  TAYLOR  INNES,  Esq.,  Advocate,  Edin- 
burgh. 

CHRISTIAN  ETHICS.     By  Rev.  Professor  LINDSAY,  D.D.,  Glasgow. 

A  LIFE  OF  ST.  PAUL.      By  Rev.  JAMES  STALKER,  M.A.,  Kirkcaldy. 

[Shortly. 

THE  WORK  OF  THE  SPIRIT.      By  Rev.  Professor  CANDLISH,  D.D. 

A  SHORT  HISTORY  OF  MISSIONS.     By  GEORGE  SMITH,  LL.D. 

[Shortly. 

APOLOGETICS.     By  Rev.  JAMES  IVERACH,  M.A.,  Aberdeen. 
PALESTINE.     By  Rev.  ARCH.  HENDERSON,  M.A.,  Crieff. 

[For  Volumes  already  issued  see  next  page. 


HANDBOOKS    FOR  BIBLE   CLASSES. 


NOW  READY. 

THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANS,     By  JAMES  MACGREGOR,  D.D., 
Edinburgh.     Price  is.  6d. 

THE  POST-EXILIAN  PROPHETS.     With  Introductions  and  Notes.     By 
Rev.  MARCUS  DODS,  D.D.,  Glasgow.     Price  2s. 

A  LIFE  OF  CHRIST.     By  Rev.   JAMES   STALKER,   M.A.,   Kirkcaldy. 
Price  is.  6d. 

THE  SACRAMENTS.     By  Rev.  Professor  CANDLISH,  D.D.,   Glasgow. 
Price  is.  6d. 

THE  BOOKS  OF  CHRONICLES.      By  Rev.  Professor  MURPHY,  LL.D., 
Belfast.     Price  is.  6d. 

THE  CONFESSION  OF  FAITH.      By  Rev.  JOHN  MACPHERSON,  M.A., 
Findhorn.     Price  2s. 

THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES.     By  Rev.  Principal  DOUGLAS,  D.D.,  Glasgow. 
Price  is.  $d. 

THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.     By  Rev.  Principal  DOUGLAS,  D.D.,  Glasgow. 
Price  is.  6d. 

THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.     By  Rev.   Professor  DAVIDSON. 
D.D.,  Edinburgh.     Price  2s.  6d. 

SCOTTISH  CHURCH  HISTORY.      By  Rev.    N.  L.  WALKER,    Dysart. 
Price  is.  6d. 

THE  CHURCH,    By  Rev.  Professor  BINNIE,  D.  D. ,  Aberdeen.    Price  is.  6d. 

THE  REFORMATION.      By  Rev.   Professor  LINDSAY,  D.D.,  Glasgow. 
Price  2s. 

THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.     By  Rev.  MARCUS  DODS,  D.D.,   Glasgow. 
Price  2s. 

THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS.     By  Rev.   Principal  BROWN,  D.D., 
Aberdeen.     Price  2s. 

PRESBYTERIANISM.     By  Rev.  JOHN  MACPHERSON,  M.A.,  Findhorn. 
Price  is.  6d. 

LESSONS  ON  THE  LIFE  OF  CHRIST.      By  Rev.  WM.  SCRYMGEOUR, 
Glasgow.     Price  2s.  6d. 

THE  SHORTER  CATECHISM.     By  Rev.  ALEXANDER  WHYTE,  D.D., 
Edinburgh.     Price  2s.  6d. 

THE    GOSPEL    ACCORDING    TO    ST.     MARK.       By    Rev.    Professor 
LINDSAY,  D.D.,  Glasgow.     Price  2s.  6(t, 


<?•. 


ANDBOOKS 


FOR 


BIBLE     CLASSES 

AND   PRIVATE   STUDENTS. 


EDITED  BY 

REV.   MARCUS  DODS,   D.D., 

AND 

REV.  ALEXANDER  WHYTE,  D.D. 


COMMENTARY  ON  THE  SHORTER  CATECHISM. 
BY  REV.  ALEXANDER   WHYTE,  D.D. 


EDINBURGH: 
T.   &    T.    CLARK,    38    GEORGE    STREET. 


PRINTED    BY   MORRISON    AND   (JIHR, 
FOR 

T.    &    T.    CLARK,    EDINBURGH. 

I.ONDOM, HAMILTON,    ADAMS,    AND   CO 

IHMIUV, GEORGE    IIER1JEKT. 

Nh\V   YORK,      ....       SCRlBNlilv    AND    WELFOKD. 


/ v4/v 


COMMENTARY 


ON  THE 


SHORTER    CATECHISM. 


BY 


REV.  ALEXANDER  WHYTE,  D.D., 

MINISTER   OF   ST.    GEORGE'S  FREE   CHURCH,    EDINBURGH. 


EDINBURGH: 
T.    &    T.     CLARK,     38     GEORGE     STREET. 


PREFATORY    NOTE. 


THE  following  pages  possess  somewhat  more  the  character  of 
a  Catena  than  that  of  an  original  Commentary.  In  his  pastoral 
work  the  author  has  repeatedly  carried  large  Bible  classes  through 
the  Shorter  Catechism,  and  part  of  his  method  has  always  been 
to  elucidate  and  enliven  the  text  by  notes  and  illustrations  taken 
from  such  writers  of  authority  and  distinction  as  were  known  to 
him.  The  results  of  this  method  of  instruction  have  been  such 
as  to  encourage  the  author  to  follow  it  in  the  compilation  of  the 
following  pages. 

This  little  book  is  sent  forth  in  the  earnest  hope  that  it  may 
be  found  useful  in  the  catechizing  of  Christian  families,  as  well 
as  in  directing  the  reading  of  private  students. 


THE    SHORTER    CATECHISM 

WITH  A 

COMMENTARY. 


QUESTION  i.   WHAT  is  the  chief  end  of  man  ? 
Answer.  Man's  chief  end*  is  to  glorify  God,a  and  to  enjoy 
him  for  ever.b 

a  i  Cor.  x.  31  :  Do  all  to  the  glory  of  God.  Rom.  xi.  36 :  To  whom  be  glory 
for  ever.  Amen. 

b  Ps.  Ixxiii.  25:  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  thee?  and  there  is  none  upon 
earth  that  I  desire  beside  thee.  Ver.  26  :  God  is  the  strength  of  my  heart,  and  my 
portion  for  ever.  Ver.  28  :  But  it  is  good  for  me  to  draw  near  to  God. 

If  an  assembly  of  philosophers  had  been  convened  at  Athens  to  compose 
a  catechism  of  religion  and  morals  for  the  youth  of  Greece,  to  a  certainty  it 
would  have  opened  with  the  very  question  before  us.  For  almost  all  the 
dialogues  and  discussions  of  the  fathers  of  moral  philosophy  revolve  around 
this  supreme  and  everlasting  question,  What  is  the  final  cause  and  chief  end 
of  man  ?  Moral  philosophy  can  put  this  question,  but  it  is  a  theology  drawn 
from  the  Holy  Scriptures  that  can  alone  supply  the  answer  :  Man's  chief  end 
is  to  glorify  God,  and  to  enjoy  Him  for  ever. 

It  has  often  been  pointed  out,  that  full  as  the  Shorter  Catechism  is  of  ripe 
Christian  doctrine,  it  is  at  the  same  time  cast  inio  a  thoroughly  scholastic 
shape.  The  Westminster  Divines  who  drew  this  document  were  deeply- 
read  and  scholarly  men.  "  It  is  perhaps  new  to  some  of  our  readers  to  be 
told,  that  the  profound  distinctions  of  an  Aristotle  and  a  Bacon  are  employed 
in  the  construction  of  that  humble  primer  called  The  Shorter  Catechism" 
(Macfarlane's  Preface  to  Paterson's  Catechism). 

Man's  chief  end — "chief  and  highest  end"  (Larger  Catechism).  Our 
well-known  word  end  most  commonly  carries  the  sense  of  a  limit,  a  boundary, 

*  ORIGINAL  NOTE. — So  much  of  every  Question  both  in  the  Larger  and  Shorter 
Catechisms,  is  repeated  in  the  Answer  as  maketh  euery  answer  an  entire  pro 
position,  or  sentence,  in  itself ;  to  the  end  the  learner  may  further  Improve  it  upon 
all  occasions,  for  his  increase  in  knowledge  and  piety,  even  out  of  the  course 
of  catechizing  as  well  as  in  it. — Cornelius  Burgess,  Prolocutor;  Henry  Roborough, 
Scriba ;  Adoniram  By  field,  Scriba, 

For  an  excellent  account  of  the  Westminster  Assembly,  from  which  the  Confession 
of  Faith  and  the  Larger  and  Shorter  Catechisms  emanated,  the  student  is 
recommended  to  read  the  Introduction  to  Macpherson's  Confession  in  the 
present  series, 

A 


2  THE    SHORTER   CATECHISM    WITH    A   COMMENTARY. 

a  termination.  But  it  also  means  an  aim,  a  purpose,  an  intention,  a  design. 
And  it  is  in  this  latter  sense  the  word  is  used  in  the  text.  The  student 
will  at  once  see  that  this  question  and  answer  carefully  recognize  other 
ends  in  man  besides  his  "chief"  end.  For  it  could  not  with  propriety  be 
said  that  man  had  a  "chief"  end  unless  he  had  also  inferior,  secondary, 
and  subordinate  ends.  The  Catechism  does  not  concern  itself  with  them, 
but  it  is  aware  of  their  existence  ;  it  implies  them  in  passing  by  them  to 
pursue  man's  chief  end. 

to  glorify  God — Glory  in  its  scriptural  use  is  a  divine  word  setting  forth, 
struggling  to  set  forth,  a  divine  thing.  The  divine  glory  is  the  revelation  of 
the  divine  perfections  in  the  works  of  creation,  providence,  and  redemption. 
God's  glory  stands  originally  in  His  possession  of  all  being,  wisdom,  power, 
holiness,  justice,  goodness,  and  truth ;  and  He  is  glorified  in  the  manifesta 
tion  of  Himself  to  all  His  receptive  and  responsive  creatures.  "The  glory  of 
God,"  says  Calvin,  "  is  when  we  know  what  He  is."  "  Glory  is  the  divinity 
manifest "  (Bengel).  In  the  fourth  verse  of  the  seventeenth  of  John  we  are 
supplied  with  an  explanation  of  this  word  which  will  admit  of  being  adapted 
and  applied  to  the  whole  creation  of  God.  In  our  Lord's  report  and  prayer 
contained  in  that  great  chapter,  He  says,  "  I  have  glorified  Thee  on  the 
earth."  And  then,  as  if  in  explanation,  He  adds,  "I  have  finished  the  work 
which  Thou  gavest  me  to  do."  Now  this  same  explanation  of  the  word, 
carried  through  the  whole  of  creation,  and  adapted  to  the  nature  and  capacity 
of  each  part,  will  make  the  meaning  of  this  great  word  as  clear  as  it  is 
capable  of  being  made.  "Man's  chief  end,"  therefore,  is  to  "finish  the 
work  God  has  given  him  to  do,"  and  what  that  work  is  the  Catechism  will 
labour  in  both  its  parts  to  set  forth.  (Consult  Cruden's  analysis,  under 
glory. ) 

"  His  word  all  things  produced, 

Though  chiefly  not  for  glory  as  chief  end, 

But  to  show  forth  His  goodness,  and  impart 

His  good  communicable  to  every  soul 

Freely  ;  of  whom  what  could  He  less  expect 

Than  glory  and  benediction,  that  is,  thanks." — MILTON. 

and  to  enjoy  him — Joy  is  the  purest,  deepest,  and  most  satisfying  delight 
that  can  possess  the  heart  of  man ;  and  the  Scriptures  continually  set  forth 
God  as  man's  chiefest  joy.  As  thus:  "In  Thy  presence  is  fulness  of  joy.  .  .  . 
Then  will  I  go  to  God,  my  exceeding  joy.  .  .  .  Enter  thou  into  the  joy  of 
thy  Lord  .  .  .  before  the  presence  of  His  glory  with  exceeding  joy."  See 
Ans.  38,  "perfectly  blessed  in  the  full  enjoying  of  God  to  all  eternity." 

for  ever.-  Never  to  end,  eternal,  everlasting.  These  words  for  ever,  occur 
four  times  altogether  in  the  Catechism.  In  the  answer  before  us  they  assure 
us  that  our  enjoyment  of  God  shall  never  come  to  an  end.  The  very  same 
words  are  found  along  with  the  pains  of  hell  in  Ans.  19 ;  with  the  con 
tinuance  of  two  distinct  natures  in  Christ  in  Ans.  21 ;  and  with  God's 
kingdom,  power,  and  glory  in  Ans.  107. 

USES. — I.  Thomas  Carlyle,  in  speaking  against  modern  materialism  in 
1876,  made  this  confession:  "The  older  I  grow,  and  I  am  now  upon 
the  brink  of  eternity,  the  more  comes  back  to  me  the  first  sentence  of 
the  Catechism  which  I  learned  when  a  child,  and  the  fuller  and  deeper 
its  meaning  becomes,  '  What  is  the  chief  end  of  man  ?  To  glorify  God, 
and  to  enjoy  Him  for  ever.' "  And  Dr.  Binnie  says  :  "  Of  the  numerous 


THE    RULE    OF    FAITH.  3 

excellences  that  have  endeared  the  Westminster  Shorter  Catechism  to 
so  many  churches  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic,  I  am  disposed  to  reckon 
this  among  the  greatest,  that  it  opens  with  such  a  solemn  announcement 
of  the  nobility  of  human  nature.  I  know  no  other  Catechism  that  opens 
so  grandly." 

2.  "Indeed,  this  seems  properly  to  be  an  affair  of  divine  revelation.     In 
order  to  be  determined  what  was  designed,  in  the  creating  of  the  astonish 
ing  fabric  of  the  universe  we  behold,  it  becomes  us  to  attend  to,  and  rely 
on,  what  HE  has  told  us,  who  was  the  architect.     He  best  knows  His 
own  heart,  and  what  His  own  ends  and  designs  were,  in  the  wonderful 
works    which    He   has   wrought"   (Jonathan   Edwards).       Students   of 
sufficient  talents  and  enterprise  should  master  Jonathan  Edwards'  trac 
tate,  A  Dissertation  concerning  the  End  for  'which  God  created  the  World. 

3.  Let  a  man  examine  himself  as  to  the  chief  end  he  sets  before  himself 
in  life. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Mention  some   of  the  subordinate  and  secondary  ends  of  man;  and  point  out 
how,  properly  pursued,  they  all  become  means  to  his  chief  end. 

2.  Derive  and  illustrate  the  rich  and  difficult  word  glory.     Giue  Scripture  passages 
where  glory   is   put  for   God  Himself,  for  Heaven,  for  the  Church,  for  the   Ark   in 
Israel,  for  the  tongue  or  power  of  speech  in  man,  for  riches,  and  for  renown. 

3.  Men  must  not  seek  their  own  glory  in  anything.     On  the  other  hand,  God,  in 
everything   He  does   and   commands   us  to   do,   seeks   His   own  glory.      Explain  and 
reconcile.    Consult  Paradise  Regained,  Book  Hi. ;  also  Edwards'  Dissertation. 

4.  Quote  utterances  of  our  Lord  to  prove  that  He  looked  on  it  as  His  chief  end  to 
glorify  the  Father. 

5.  Point  out  Scripture  passages  to  illustrate  Bengel's  note:  He  calls  Him  Father 
because  He  derives  His  origination  from  Him ;  He  calls  Him  God  because  He  has 
Him  for  His  end. 


Q.  2.  What  rule  hath  God  given  to  direct  us  how  we  may  glorify 
and  enjoy  him  ? 

A.  The  word  of  God,  which  is  contained  in  the  scriptures  of 
the  Old  and  New  Testaments,0  is  the  only  rule  to  direct  us  how 
we  may  glorify  and  enjoy  him.d 

c  2  Tim.  iii.  16  :  All  scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  is  profitable 
for  doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  correction,  for  instruction  in  righteousness.  Eph. 
ii.  20  :  Built  upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ  him 
self  being  the  chief  corner-stone. 

11 1  John  i.  3  :  That  which  we  have  seen  and  heard  declare  we  unto  you,  that  ye 
also  may  have  fellowship  with  us  :  and  truly  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and 
with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  Ver.  4 :  And  these  things  write  we  unto  you,  that  your 
joy  may  be  full. 

The  student  who  would  understand  and  appreciate  the  Shorter  Catechism 
must  at  every  turn  attend  to  the  construction  and  development  of  this 
orderly  and  elaborate  work.  The  foundations  of  all  religion,  natural  and 
revealed,  have  already  been  laid  in  the  doctrine,  "Man's  chief  end  is  to  glorify 
God,  and  to  enjoy  Him  for  ever."  And  now  the  second  question  naturally  and 


4  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

logically  asks,   "  What  rule  God  hath  given  to  direct  us  how  we  may  glorify 
and  enjoy  Him  ?  " 

The  word — The  Word  of  God  is  the  title  of  a  Divine  and  Eternal  Person 
before  it  is  applied  in  a  subordinate  and  historical  sense  to  the  communica 
tions  made  through  Him,  and  recorded  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  (John  i.  I,  14; 
I  John  i.  I ;  Rev.  xix.  13).  And  all  the  divinity  and  authority  of  the  written 
word  are  ultimately  derived  from  the  original  divinity  and  authority  of  that 
Divine  Person  who  is  the  Eternal  and  Living  Word.  "Therefore,  as  all 
revelations  from  heaven  are  duly  designated  by  the  title  of  the  Word  of  God, 
so  the  highest  place  must  be  assigned  to  that  substantial  Word,  the  source  of 
all  inspiration,  which,  as  being  liable  to  no  variation,  remains  for  ever  one 
and  the  same  with  God,  and  is  God  "  (Calvin). 

The  word  of  God  in  the  text,  however,  does  not  bear  this  high  sense. 
"  The  Holy  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  are  the  word  of  God, 
the  only  rule  of  faith  and  obedience  "  (Larger  Catechism). 

the  scriptures — Anything  written,  'writings,  documents  ;  but  now  uni 
versally  used  by  way  of  distinction  to  describe  the  canonical  books  of  the  Old 
and  New  Testaments. 

the  Old  and  New  Testaments— The  word  testament  was  originally  a  term 
of  law.  And  in  legal  language  it  still  designates  that  testifying  instrument  by 
means  of  which  a  man  declares  his  will  as  to  the  disposal  of  his  possessions 
after  his  death.  The  word  is  used  repeatedly  in  this  sense  in  the  Epistle  to 
the  Hebrews.  To  explain  fully  how  it  came  about  that  this  word  testament 
stands  as  the  translation  of  covenant,  first  in  the  Latin  versions  of  the 
Scriptures,  and  then  through  the  Latin  in  our  own  version,  would  lead  us 
into  matter  unsuitable  for  this  Commentary.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  original 
Greek  term  is  seen  passing  into  our  testament  through  the  Scotch  law  word 
disposition,  and  that  the  words  Old  and  New  Testaments  are  now  appropriated 
to  designate  the  two  collections  of  canonical  books  belonging  to  the  two  great 
economies  or  covenants  under  which  God  has  successively  placed  His  people. 
"The  Greek  word  for  covenant  was  never  naturalized  in  the  Latin  of  the 
Western  and  African  Churches,  and  the  writers  of  those  Churches  were  for  a 
time  undecided  as  to  what  equivalent  they  should  use  for  it,  and  wavered 
between  fcedus,  a  '  covenant ; '  instrumentum,  a  '  deed  ; '  and  test  amentum, 
a  'will.'  The  earlier  Latin  writers,  such  as  Tertullian,  use  both  the  latter 
words,  but  state  that  the  last  was  the  more  generally  accepted  term.  As 
such,  it  passed  first  into  the  early  Latin  versions  of  the  Scriptures,  and  then 
into  Jerome's  Vulgate,  and  so  became  familiar  through  the  whole  of  Latin 
Christendom"  (Plumptre).  "Tertullian,  A.D.  160-240,  is  the  first  writer,  I 
believe,  who  uses  the  word  'Testamentum  '  in  its  ordinary  acceptation,  though 
'it  seems  to  have  been  current  before  his  time  "  (Westcott).  (See  Confession, 
chap.  vii.  4-6.  It  will  repay  the  student  to  consult  the  article  "New 
Testament"  in  Fairbairn's  Bible  Dictionary.} 

the  only  rule — A  rule  in  its  proper  and  original  signification  is  an  instrument 
by  means  of  which  we  draw  the  straightest  and  shortest  line  from  one  point  to 
another  (Greek,  canon,  a  reed  or  rule,  whence  come  a  series  of  English 
words,  all  implying  the  idea  of  straitness,  "cane,"  "canal,"  "channel," 
"cannon,"  etc.  See  a  very  instructive  note  on  the  history  of  the  word 
canon  in  Westcott's  Canon  of  the  New  Testament,  Appendix).  And  accord 
ingly,  when  the  term  is  used  in  a  moral  and  religious  sense,  it  imports 


THE   RULE   OF   FAITH.  5 

nothing  else  than  a  direction,  or  instruction,  or  command,  by  attending  to 
which  a  man  best  attains  the  end  desired.  In  the  polemical  phrase,  only  rule, 
there  is  a  trace  left  of  those  burning  controversies  in  which  the  Reformers 
and  Puritans  were  engaged  with  Popish  and  Prelatic  divines.  This  position 
was  taken  up  against  the  Romish  and  Anglican  practice  of  adding  apocryphal 
writings  and  oral  traditions  to  the  rule  of  faith  as  it  is  contained  in  the 
canonical  Scriptures.  Hooker's  Ecclesiastical  Polity,  the  greatest  work  of 
English  theology,  and  one  of  the  chief  ornaments  of  English  literature,  rose 
out  of  this  hot  contention.  It  is  a  standard  work  on  Anglican  doctrine,  and 
as  such  it  is  a  via  media  between  Romanism  on  the  one  hand  and  Puritanism 
on  the  other.  The  Westminster  Confession  of  Faith,  and  the  Larger  and 
Shorter  Catechisms  on  the  other  hand,  are  thoroughgoing  Protestant  symbols 
on  this  as  on  other  disputed  questions.  And  the  present  doctrine  of  the 
Catechism  is  drawn  directly  against  the  Romanist  position,  which  maintains 
that  revelation  is  partly  written  and  partly  unwritten  ;  and  that  the  rule  of 
faith  includes  both  Scripture  and  tradition. — "Tradition  is  always  repre 
sented  by  Romanists  as  not  only  the  interpreter,  but  the  complement  of  the 
Scriptures.  The  Bible,  therefore,  according  to  the  Church  of  Rome,  is 
incomplete.  It  does  not  contain  all  the  Church  is  bound  to  believe  ;  nor  are 
the  doctrines  which  it  does  contain  therein  fully  or  clearly  made  known  u 
(Hodge).  But  one  who  once  occupied  the  -via  media  on  this  question,  while 
yet  he  occupied  it  wrote  thus:  "Scripture  has  a  gift  which  tradition  has 
not ;  it  is  fixed,  tangible,  accessible,  readily  applicable,  and  besides  all  this, 
perfectly  true  in  all  its  parts  and  relations ;  in  a  word,  it  is  a  sacred  text.  .  .  . 
Tradition  gives  us  little  or  nothing  that  can  be  handled  and  argued  from. 
We  can  argue  only  from  a  text,  we  can  argue  freely  only  from  an  inspired 
text.  Thus  Scripture  is  in  itself  specially  fitted  for  that  office  which  we  assign 
to  it  in  our  Article  :  to  be  a  repository  of  manifold  and  various  doctrines,  a 
means  of  proof,  a  standard  of  appeal,  an  umpire  and  test  between  truth  and 
falsehood  in  all  emergencies." 

to  direct  us  how  we  may  glorify  and  enjoy  him. 

"  Lead  me  to  holiness,  the  road 
That  I  must  take  to  dwell  with  God : 
Lead  to  Thy  Word,  that  rules  must  give, 
And  sure  directions  how  to  live." 

USES. — I.  "Alas  !  many  have  the  Bible,  and  use  it  but  little;  and  many 
use  it  amiss,  because  they  know  not  its  right  name.  It  is  well  and 
warrantably  called,  from  its  contents,  on  its  title-page,  the  Old  and 
New  Testaments  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  But  how  few, 
in  reading  this  title,  mind  the  use  and  virtue  of  the  blood  of  Christ  Jesus, 
which  turned  the  covenant  of  God's  grace  into  the  testament  of  Christ, 
and  thereby  sealed  and  confirmed  all  the  good  words  and  good  things  in 
that  covenant !  "  (Robert  Traill). 

2.  "Concerning  the  actual  state  of  man  in  this  world  ;  considering,  I  say, 
what  he  is,  any  standard  of  duty  which  does  not  convict  him  of  real  and 
multiplied   sins,  and  of  his  utter   inability  to  please  God  of  his  own 
strength,  is  untrue  ;  and  any  rule  of  life  which  leaves  him  contented  with 
himself,  without  fear,  without  anxiety,  without  humiliation,  is  deceptive  ; 
it  is  the  blind  leading  the  blind  ;  yet  such,  in  one  shape  or  other,  is  the 
religion  of  the  whole  earth  beyond  the  pale  of  the  Christian  Church  " 
(Newman). 

3.  Read  Faithful's  apology  before  Judge  Hategood  at  Vanity  Fair. 


6  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Give  the  passages  where  the  Son  of  God  bears  the  name  Word  of  God.     Draw 
out  their  meaning. 

2.  Explain  the  expressions— Moses,  Luke  xxiu.  27;  revelation,  2  Cor.  xil.   1,  Rev. 
1.  7;  scripture,  Gal.  Hi.  8,  2  Tim.  Hi.  16;  volume,  Ps.  xl.  7;  testament,  Matt,  xxui.  28. 
Heb.  ix.  16. 

3.  Explain  Hooker's  words :  It  is  a  matter  merely  accidental  to  the  Word  of  God 
to  be  written. 

4.  Analyze  the  fourth  answer  in  the  Larger  Catechism.     Cp.   Confession,  i.  5,  and 
explain  the  phrase  the  consent  of  all  the  parts. 

5.  Distinguish  between  the  biblical  record  and  the  biblical  inculcation. 


Q.  3.   What  do  the  scriptures  principally  teach  1 
A.  The  scriptures  principally  teach  what  man  is  to  believe 
concerning  God,  and  what  duty  God  requires  of  man.6 

e  2  Tim.  i.  13  :  Hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words,  which  thou  hast  heard  of 
me,  in  faith  and  love  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  2  Tim.  iii.  16.  [See  in  letter  C.J 

The  two  first  Questions  in  the  Catechism  are  introductory  to  the  body  of  the 
work,  as  has  already  been  pointed  out.  And  the  whole  superstructure  is 
exhibited  in  outline  in  the  present  Answer  :  "  what  man  is  to  believe  concern 
ing  God,  and  what  duty  God  requires  of  man. "  The  Questions  from  4  to  38 
inclusive,  then  deal,  broadly  speaking,  with  matters  of  faith  (theology),  and 
the  Questions  from  39  to  the  end  of  the  work  treat  principally  of  duty 
(morals).  These  two  great  divisions  contain  their  own  respective  sub 
divisions,  which  will  be  indicated  as  we  meet  with  them. 

principally — There  is  a  great  variety  of  matters  treated  of  in  the  scrip 
tures  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments ;  but,  as  this  qualifying  word  points 
out,  their  principal  intention  is  to  teach  "what  man  is  to  believe  concerning 
God,  and  what  duty  God  requires  of  man."  Man's  chief  end  is  to  glorify  God, 
and  to  enjoy  Him  for  ever,  and  the  Scriptures  flrmcifiatfy  teach  him  how  he  is 
to  do  so.  There  are  incidental,  occasional,  and  subordinate  ends  that  both 
man  and  Scripture  serve,  but  their  chief  and  principal  end  is  set  forth  clearly 
and  correctly  in  the  Catechism.  "  Although  the  Scripture  of  God,  therefore, 
be  stored  with  infinite  variety  of  matter  in  all  kinds,  although  it  abound  with 
all  sorts  of  laws,  yet  the  principal  intent  of  Scripture  is  to  deliver  the  laws  of 
duties  supernatural.  .  .  .  The  several  books  of  Scripture  having  each  had 
some  several  occasion  and  particular  purpose  which  caused  them  to  be  written, 
the  contents  thereof  are  according  to  the  exigence  of  that  special  end  where- 
unto  they  are  intended.  Hereupon  it  groweth  that  every  book  of  Holy 
Scripture  doth  take  out  of  all  kinds  of  truth — natural  (Eph.  v.  29),  historical 
(2  Tim.  iii.  8),  foreign  (Tit.  i.  12),  supernatural  (2  Pet.  ii.  4) — so  much  as 
the  matter  handled  requireth"  (Hooker).  "It  is  here  intimated  that  the 
sacred  writings  teach  some  things  beside  what  we  are  to  believe  concerning 
God,  and  what  we  are  to  consider  as  our  duty  to  Him.  The  Bible  contains  a 
good  deal  of  biography  and  history,  and  many  genealogies  ;  and  all  that  it 


WHAT  DO   THE   SCRIPTURES   PRINCIPALLY  TEACH  ?  7 

contains  is  unmixed  verity,  and  none  of  it  is  without  its  use.  But  the  word 
we  consider  intimates,  and  the  fact  is  unquestionably  so,  that  some  parts  of 
the  Scripture  are  much  more  important  than  others.  The  most  important, 
that  is,  the  principal  parts,  are  those  which  teach  us  faith  and  practice  "  (Dr. 
Ashbel  Green's  Lectures}.  "Although  all  Scripture  is  the  word  of  God,  and 
consequently  all  equally  true,  and  no  part  of  it  undeserving  our  notice,  yet  all 
things  in  it  are  not  equally  important,  nor  equally  connected  with  eternal 
salvation.  Those  things  which  man  is  bound  to  believe  and  do,  as  necessary 
to  salvation,  are  the  things  which  the  Scriptures  principally  teach  "  (Paterson). 

to  believe  concerning  God — Belief  is  the  assent  of  the  mind  to  what  is 
told  us  on  competent  and  credible  authority.  We  are  said  to  believe  when 
we  are  convinced  of  a  fact  without  our  having  had  immediate  and  personal 
knowledge  of  it.  Belief  and  faith  are  precisely  the  same  state  of  mind  ;  the 
thing  is  the  same,  though  the  names  are  different.  Divines  distinguish  human 
faith  and  divine  faith,  meaning  thereby  faith  resting  on  the  testimony  of  man, 
and  faith  reposing  on  the  word  of  God.  The  latter  is  the  faith  or  belief  of  the 
text.  For  the  broadest  and  most  general  description  and  illustration  of  divine 
faith,  see  Heb.  xi. ;  Pearson,  Art.  I.  ;  and  Grammar  of  Assent,  chap.  v. :  and 
for  a  theological  definition  of  that  particular  exercise  of  faith  which  justifies  the 
sinner  in  the  sight  of  God,  see  Questions  33  and  86. 

"  Canst  thou  by  reason  more  of  Godhead  know 
Than  Plutarch,  Seneca,  and  Cicero?" 

duty — That  which  we  ought  to  do  ;  that  which  we  are  under  an  obligation 
to  do.  We  are  so  constituted  in  our  creation,  that  when  we  see  anything  to 
be  right,  we  cannot  but  feel  it  is  our  duty  to  do  it.  "An  orthodox  faith  and 
an  obedient  life  is  the  whole  duty  of  man." 

USES. — I.  "  The  general  design  of  Scripture,  considered  as  historical,  may 
be  said  to  be,  to  give  an  account  of  the  world,  in  this  single  view  as 
God's  world  ;  by  which  it  appears  essentially  distinguished  from  all  other 
books,  so  far  as  I  have  found,  except  such  as  are  copied  from  it" 
(Butler). 

2.  "  Search  the  Scriptures  ;  for  in  them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal  life  :  and 
they  are  they  which  testify  of  me  "  (John  v.  39). 

3.  2  Tim.  iii.  14-17. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  The  three  first  Answers  in  the  Catechism  are  introductory.     Characterize  their 
contents,  and  distribute  the  body  of  the  work  according  to  the  division  supplied  in 
Answer  3. 

2.  "Among  them  all,  none  excel  this  little  Catechism  of  the  Assembly  for  orthodoxy 
fulness,  and  method  "  (Flavel).    Exhibit  its  excellent  method. 

3.  Study  Cruden's  analysis  of  Belief. 

4.  Explain  Hooker's  words :  natural,  historical,  foreign,  supernatural,  quoted  above, 
and  connect  them  with  his  texts. 

5.  Explain  this  saying,  also  of  the  same  writer:  The  Scripture  is  fraught  with 
laws  of  nature. 

6.  Expand  and  illustrate  Wordsworth 's  line : 

The  primal  duties  shine  aloft  like  stars. 


8  THE    SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

Q.  4.    What  is  God? 

A.  God  is  a  Spirit/  infinite,  &  eternal, h  and  unchangeable,1  in 
his  being,J  wisdom,k  power,1  holiness,111  justice,  goodness,  and 
truth.n 

f  John  iv.  24  :  God  is  a  Spirit :  and  they  that  worship  him  must  worship  him  in 
spirit  and  in  truth. 

« Job  xi.  7:  Canst  thou  by  searching  find  out  God?  canst  thou  find  out  the 
Almighty  unto  perfection.  Ver.  8  :  It  is  as  high  as  heaven  ;  what  canst  thou  do  ? 
deeper  than  hell ;  what  canst  thou  know  ?  Ver.  9  :  The  measure  thereof  is  longer 
than  the  earth,  and  broader  than  the  sea. 

h  Ps.  xc.  2 :  Before  the  mountains  were  brought  forth,  or  ever  thou  hadst  formed 
the  earth  and  the  world,  even  from  everlasting  to  everlasting  thou  art  God. 

*  Jas.  i.  17  :  .  .  .  the  Father  of  lights,  with  whom  is  no  variableness,  neither 
shadow  of  turning. 

J  Ex.  iii.  14 :  And  God  said  unto  Moses,  I  AM  THAT  I  AM  ;  and  he  said, 
Thus  shalt  thou  say  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  I  AM  hath  sent  me  unto  you. 

k  Ps.  cxlvii.  5  :  Great  is  our  Lord,  and  of  great  power :  his  understanding  is 
infinite. 

1  Rev.  iv.  8  :  Holy,  holy,  holy,  Lord  God  Almighty,  which  was,  and  is,  and  is 
to  come. 

m  Rev.  xv.  4  :  Who  shall  not  fear  thee,  O  Lord,  and  glorify  thy  name  ?  for  thou 
only  art  holy :  for  all  nations  shall  come  and  worship  before  thee  ;  for  thy 
judgments  are  made  manifest. 

n  Ex.  xxxiv.  6 :  And  the  Lord  passed  by  before  him,  and  proclaimed,  The 
Lord,  The  Lord  God,  .  .  .  abundant  in  goodness  and  truth,  Ver.  7  :  Keeping 
mercy  for  thousands,  forgiving  iniquity,  and  transgression,  and  sin,  and  that  will 
by  no  means  clear  the  guilty ;  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children, 
and  upon  the  children's  children. 


The  compilers  of  the  Catechism  have  taken  our  Lord's  words  to  the  woman 
of  Samaria  as  the  basis  of  their  answer  to  the  loftiest  of  all  questions,  and 
they  have  filled  up  the  definition  with  an  enumeration  of  the  divine  attributes 
carefully  collected  out  of  Holy  Scripture,  altogether  constructing  a  statement 
on  this  great  subject  of  which  Dr.  Hodge  says  that  it  is  "  probably  the  best 
definition  ever  penned  by  man."  The  tradition  that  connected  this  Answer 
with  a  prayer  of  George  Gillespie's  in  the  Westminster  Assembly,  is  now 
discredited  by  our  best  authorities. 

God — "The  old  Saxon  word  God  is  identical  with  good.  God  is  the  good 
One,  personified  goodness.  There  is  in  that  derivation  not  a  mere  play  upon 
words, — there  is  a  deep  truth"  (Frederick  Robertson).  But  Webster  says : 
"As  this  word  and  good  are  written  exactly  alike  in  Anp-lo-Saxon,  it  has  been 
inferred  that  God  was  named  from  His  goodness.  But  this  is  probably  an 
idea  too  remote  from  the  rude  conceptions  of  men  in  early  ages.  With  the 
exception  of  the  word  Jehovah  [see  Q.  44],  the  name  of  the  Supreme  Being 
appears  usually  to  have  reference  to  His  supremacy  or  power,  and  to  be 
equivalent  to  lord  or  ruler.  In  the  present  case  there  is  some  evidence  that 
this  is  the  sense  of  this  word  ;  for  in  Persian  Godd  signifies  lord,  master, 
prince,  or  ruler."  And  Skeat,  our  latest  and  best  authority  on  etymological 
questions,  says:  "  God,  the  Supreme  Being.  .  .  .  The  name  is  of  unknown 
origin ;  quite  distinct  and  separate  from  good,  with  which  it  has  often  been 
conjecturally  connected."  (Cf.  also  Max  Mullet's  Lectures,  s.v.) 


WHAT   IS   GOD?  9 

God  ia  a  Spirit,  or  better,  both  in  grammar  and  theology,  "  God  is  Spirit." 
"God  is  pure  Spirit,  perhaps  better  not  'a  Spirit,'  since  it  is  His  essence, 
not  His  personality,  which  is  here  spoken  of"  (Alford).  Compare  the  two 
other  definitions  found  in  I  John — "God  is  light,"  and  "God  is  love" — 
with  which  this  present  definition  must,  in  Westcott's  words,  be  "compared 
and  combined." 

This  word  Spirit, — "the  profoundest  word  in  human  language"  (Stier), — 
as  employed  in  Scripture  and  theology,  like  so  much  of  their  vocabulary, 
bears  a  figurative  or  metaphorical  sense.  The  growth  of  the  word  is  some 
thing  like  this.  It  first  means  air,  the  air  that  is  the  atmosphere  of  the  earth, 
and  the  breath  of  all  its  living  creatures.  From  this  it  is  a  short  and  easy 
step  to  become  expressive  of  the  life  of  man,  and  the  life  of  his  soul,  as  in  the 
cry  :  "Into  Thine  hand  I  commit  my  spirit."  And  from  that  highest  earthly 
use  the  word  has  been  taken  up  and  consecrated  to  describe  for  us  the  manner 
of  God's  own  life.  "God  is  Spirit."  And  this  single  expression  at  once 
does  this  great  service  for  us,  that  it  removes  God's  nature  far  from  all  associa 
tion  with  material  and  corporal  organization.  For,  as  our  Lord  said :  "A  spirit 
hath  not  flesh  and  bones,  as  ye  see  me  have."  God,  then,  is  Spirit,  such  and 
such  as  the  Scripture  and  the  Catechism  teach  us  concerning  Him.  "  RE 
SOLVED  upon  the  question,  Hath  God  any  body,  or  is  He  to  be  seen  with 
bodily  eyes? — A.  God  is  a  Spirit,  invisible,  without  body  or  bodily  parts, 
not  like  a  man  or  any  other  creature.  ORDERED. — Q.  Since  you  say  God 
cannot  be  seen,  how  do  you  know  that  there  is  a  God? — A.  I  am  sure  there 
is  a  God,  because  the  things  that  are  in  the  world  could  neither  have  their 
being  nor  their  preservation,  nor  be  ordered  as  they  are,  without  God " 
(Minutes  of  Session  of  Westminster  Assembly,  714,  Sept.  22,  1646,  Tuesday 
morning). 

infinite — Without  limit  or  boundary.  We  cannot  cross  a  line  and  say, 
"Now  here  God  is  not ;  here  is  a  limit  which  He  has  not  passed,  and  cannot 
pass. "  ' '  Trismegistus  sayd  God  was  a  circle,  whose  center  is  everywhere, 
but  His  circumference  is  noe  where."  This  word  is  used  here,  as  always  in 
Scripture,  in  a  theological  and  religious,  rather  than  a  philosophical  and 
speculative  way.  This  attribute  of  God  is  set  forth  in  Scripture  and  in  the 
Catechism  less  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  intellect  than  for  the  exercise  of  the 
affections,  imaginations,  and  consciences  of  men.  And  thus  the  Scriptures 
bring  the  awful  doctrine  of  the  divine  infinitude  to  bear  on  us  in  the  most 
affecting  and  practical  way.  "  Am  I  a  God  at  hand,  saith  the  Lord,  and  not 
a  God  afar  off?  Can  any  hide  himself  in  secret  places  that  I  shall  not  see 
him?  saith  the  Lord.  Do  not  I  fill  heaven  and  earth?  saith  the  Lord." 
And  this  attribute,  rightly  and  religiously  reflected  on,  will  always  awaken 
adoration  and  godly  fear  after  this  manner  :  "O  Lord,  Thou  hast  searched 
me  and  known  me.  .  .  .  Thou  hast  beset  me  behind  and  before,  and  laid 
Thine  hand  upon  me.  Whither  shall  I  go  from  Thy  Spirit,  or  whither  shall 
I  flee  from  Thy  presence  ?  If  I  ascend  into  heaven,  Thou  art  there ;  if  I 
make  my  bed  in  hell,  behold,  Thou  art  there.  Such  knowledge  is  too  won 
derful  for  me  :  it  is  high,  I  cannot  attain  unto  it. "  In  this  way  those  for  whom 
the  Catechism  is  designed  may  be  profitably  and  impressively  taught  what  the 
greatest  minds  cannot  comprehend.  "Thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the 
wise  and  prudent,  and  hast  revealed  them  unto  babes." 

eternal— As  we  associate  infinitude  with  unbounded  space,  so  we  are 
compelled  to  think  of  eternity  as  unbeginning  and  unending  time.  "  But  as 


10  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

the  substance  of  God  alone  is  infinite,  and  hath  no  kind  of  limitation,  so  like 
wise  His  continuance  is  from  everlasting  to  everlasting,  and  knoweth  neither 
beginning  nor  end.  .  .  .  Out  of  this  we  gather  that  only  God  hath  true 
immortality  or  eternity,  that  is  to  say,  continuance  wherein  there  groweth  no 
difference  by  addition  of  hereafter  unto  now;  whereas  the  noblest  and  perfectest 
of  all  beings  besides  have  continually  through  continuance  the  time  of  former 
continuance  lengthened.  So  that  they  could  not  heretofore  be  said  to  have 
continued  so  long  as  now,  neither  now  so  long  as  hereafter"  (Hooker).  The 
divine  name  THE  ETERNAL,  is  connected  with  the  great  name  JEHOVAH,  I 
AM,  He  who  Is,  He  who  alone  truly  and  eternally  Is,  the  Self-existing,  the 
Everlasting.  "  The  Hebrews  attached  a  higher  and  more  solemn  meaning 
to  eternal  existence  than  to  creative  energy.  In  Rev.  i.  8,  God  is  called  the 
Alpha  and  the  Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  end,  He  who  was  and  is  and  is 
to  come,  three  epithets  signifying  eternity,  which  are  followed  by  one  only, — 
the  Almighty,  indicating  power."  (See  Appendix  to  Ewald,  History  of 
Israel,  ii.)  The  Arabic  version  of  Ex.  iii.  14  has  "The  Eternal  who  never 
passeth  away,"  where  the  English  has  "I  AM  THAT  I  AM."  "In  my 
solitary  and  retired  imagination  I  remember  that  I  am  not  alone,  and  there 
fore  forget  not  to  contemplate  Him  and  His  attributes,  who  is  ever  with  me, 
especially  those  two  mighty  ones,  His  wisdom  and  eternity.  With  the  one  I 
recreate,  and  with  the  other  I  confound  my  understanding.  In  eternity  there 
is  no  distinction  of  tenses ;  for  to  His  eternity,  which  is  indivisible  and  all 
together,  the  last  trump  is  already  sounded,  the  reprobate  is  in  the  flame,  and 
the  blessed  in  Abraham's  bosom  "  (Religio  Medici).  On  the  profound  theo 
logical  and  religious  significance  of  the  prophet's  words  "inhabiteth  eternity," 
see  Goodwin,  Of  the  Creatures,  Book  i.  chap.  iii. 

unchangeable — This  also  is  spoken  of  only  as  it  bears  on  our  faith  and 
trust.  He  is  "the  Father  of  lights,  with  whom  is  no  variableness,  neither 
shadow  of  turning."  And  when  it  is  said  that  He  changes,  and  repents,  and 
takes  back  for  good  or  evil  that  which  He  has  spoken,  all  that  again  is  but  a 
fuller  application  of  the  principle  of  condescension  on  which  all  divine  revela 
tions  are  made ;  God  speaking  to  man  in  ways  that  man  can  understand. 

in  his  being — The  foregoing  words — infinite,  eternal,  and  unchangeable — 
characterize  and  describe  the  being,  wisdom,  power,  holiness,  justice,  good 
ness,  and  truth  of  God.  He  is  infinite,  eternal,  and  unchangeable  in  each 
and  all  of  these  attributes.  Being  expresses  reality  of  existence  as  contrasted 
with  non-existence.  Thus  Jehovah,  I  AM,  signifies  BEING;  originality, 
eternity,  unchangeableness,  and  fruitfulness  of  being.  The  I  AM  thus 
becomes  known  as  the  Eternal  (see  Ewald,  ii.  440).  "  The  true  name  of 
Being  is  proper  to  God  only ;  the  creatures  are  in  themselves  but  shadows 
and  appearances  of  beings.  God  alone  is  "  (Goodwin). 

•wisdom — "  Knowing  all  things,  most  wise  "  (Larger  Catechism).  When 
spoken  of  as  an  attribute  of  man,  wisdom,  while  comprehending  certain  intel 
lectual  qualities,  gives  much  more  prominence  to  the  moral.  Taking  its  rise 
necessarily  in  the  mind,  wisdom  attains  its  fulness  only  in  the  depth  and  purity 
of  the  heart.  (See  Sir  Henry  Taylor,  Of  Wisdom.}  There  cannot,  indeed,  be 
wisdom  where  there  is  no  knowledge ;  but  there  may  be  great  stores  of 
learning  and  knowledge  where  there  is  a  total  absence  of  wisdom.  Know 
ledge  often  puffeth  up  ;  wisdom  always  buildeth  up.  And  it  is  wisdom  in  its 
purest  and  noblest  human  sense  that  is  here  applied  to  God.  In  the  Old 


WHAT   IS    GOD?  II 

Testament,  especially  in  the  later  and  what  are  called  the  sapiential  books, 
the  Divine  Wisdom  attains  a  prominence,  and  vividness,  and  distinction 
among  the  other  attributes  of  God  that  prepare  the  way  for  the  advent  of 
that  Divine  Person  who  is  afterwards  announced  as  the  Wisdom  and  the 
Word  of  God.  But  here  again  the  gracious,  the  religious,  and  the  practical 
aspects  of  the  truth  govern  and  subordinate  the  philosophical  and  speculative 
ideas.  See  Cowper's  paraphrase  of  Prov.  viii.  22-36  : 

"  Ere  God  had  built  the  mountains." 

power— Infinite  in  power.  Hence  God  is  often  in  Scripture  sprfken  of  as 
the  Almighty,  or  the  Omnipotent.  "  The  word  Almighty  conveys  three  ideas 
— that  God  is  omnipotent,  His  dominion  universal,  and  His  essence  infinite." 
' '  God's  power  is  limited  only  by  the  workings  of  His  will.  He  doth  not 
work  all  things  that  He  might  work.  '  Unto  Thee,'  saith  Christ,  'all  things 
are  possible.'  God  doth  not  show  Himself  omnipotent  by  doing  all  He  can 
do,  but  everything  that  He  doth  do  He  showeth  an  almighty  power  in  it  " 
(Goodwin). 

holiness — "This  word  is  nothing  but  Middle  English  fool  (now  spelt  whole}. 
The  original  sense  is  perfect  or  excellent"  (Skeat).  Holiness,  therefore, 
etymologically,  as  well  as  theologically  and  religiously,  is  inward  health  or 
spiritual  wholesomeness.  "It  is  instructive  to  note  how  the  Psalmist  dwells 
upon  the  holy  name  of  God,  as  if  His  holiness  were  dearest  to  him,  or 
perhaps  because  the  holiness  or  wholeness  of  God  was  to  his  mind  the 
grandest  motive  for  rendering  to  Him  the  homage  of  his  nature  in  its  whole 
ness.  Babes  may  praise  the  divine  goodness,  but  fathers  in  grace  magnify 
His  holiness"  (Spurgeon).  " Holiness  is  intellectual  beauty.  Divine  holiness 
is  the  most  perfect  and  the  measure  of  all  other.  .  .  .  The  divine  holiness 
is  the  most  perfect  pulchritude,  '  the  ineffable  and  immortal  pulchritude, 
that  cannot  be  declared  by  words  or  seen  with  eyes,' — they  are  a  heathen's 
expression  concerning  it.  This  may  therefore  be  styled  a  transcendental 
attribute,  that,  as  it  were,  runs  through  the  rest,  and  casts  a  glory  upon  every 
one.  It  is  an  attribute  of  attributes.  Those  are  fit  predications,  holy  power, 
holy  truth,  holy  love.  And  so  it  is  the  very  lustre  and  glory  of  His  other 
perfections,  He  is  '  glorious  in  holiness  '  "  (Howe). 

justice — Integrity  and  uprightness  as  of  a  true  judge  with  whom  is  no  respect 
of  persons.  The  Scriptures  reveal  the  divine  law  as  the  foundation  of  all  God's 
dealings  with  men.  Whatever  else  in  God  is  manifested  to  man,  His  justice 
is  never  set  aside  or  forgotten.  Even  in  justifying  the  ungodly,  the  justice  of 
God  is  magnified.  "Nothing  is  more  precisely  according  to  the  truth  of 
things  than  divine  justice  ;  it  weighs  things  in  an  even  balance  ;  it  views  and 
estimates  things  no  otherwise  than  they  are  truly  in  their  own  natures  " 
(Jonathan  Edwards).  And  the  greatest  teacher  of  morals  outside  the  Hebrew 
dispensation,  taught  that  "injustice  every  virtue  is  summarily  comprehended." 

"  Not  even-star  nor  morning-star  so  fair." 

See  Hooker,  Serm.  iii.  ;  Howe's  Living  Temple,  ii.  7 ;  Owen's  Dissertation 
on  Divine  Justice  ;  Jonathan  Edwards'  Diary. 

goodness — "  Goodness  is  the  genus  that  comprehends  mercy,  grace,  long- 
suffering,  kindness,  truth,  etc.  in  it;  these  are  branches  from  that  as  the  root" 
(Goodwin  on  Ex.  xxxiii.  19).  "  From  the  beginning  of  the  world  till  now, 


12  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH    A    COMMENTARY. 

all  effluxes  which  have  come  from  God  have  been  nothing  but  emanations 
of  His  goodness,  clothed  in  variety  of  circumstances.  He  made  man  with  no 
other  design  than  that  man  should  be  happy,  and  by  receiving  derivations  from 
His  fountain  of  mercy,  might  reflect  glory  to  Him.  .  .  .  And  grace  is  the 
treasure  of  the  divine  goodness,  the  great  and  admirable  efflux  of  the  eternal 
beneficence,  ' the  riches  of  His  goodness, '  which  whosoever  despises,  despises 
himself  and  the  great  interests  of  his  own  felicity  ;  he  shall  die  in  his 
impenitence,  and  perish  in  his  folly  "  (Jeremy  Taylor). 

"  But  Thou  hast  promised  from  us  two  a  race 
To  fill  the  earth,  who  shall  with  us  extol 
Thy  goodness  infinite,  both  when  we  wake 
And  when  we  seek,  as  now,  thy  gift  of  sleep." — MILTON. 

"  'For  He  is  good.'  Is  not  this  the  Old  Testament  version  of  'God  is 
love  '  ?  "  (A.  A.  Bonar). 

and  truth.  It  is  clear  that  truth  as  an  attribute  of  God  must  mean  some 
thing  far  nobler  than  fact  or  information,  a  common  use  of  the  word  in  the 
ordinary  speech  of  mankind.  Neither  is  truth  to  be  taken  here  merely  as 
opposed  to  error,  falsehood,  and  deceit.  When  our  Lord,  addressing  His 
Father,  said,  "  Thy  word  is  truth,"  He  had  something  far  greater  in  His 
mind  than  merely  that  God's  word  is  true  and  trustworthy.  Truth  in  the  text 
and  in  our  Lord's  Prayer  embraces  the  whole  revelation  of  God  that  has  been 
at  any  time,  or  in  any  manner,  made  to  man ;  all  that  it  is  God's  glory  to 
reveal,  and  man's  blessedness  to  believe  and  enjoy.  Truth,  the  highest  and 
surest  truth,  is  that  God  is  true,  and  that  Jesus  Christ  is  His  Truth.  "  I  am 
the  Way,  the  TRUTH,  and  the  Life."  "  Truth,  \s>  grace  clad  with  a  promise 
and  put  forth  in  exercise  "  (Bengel). 

"  Now  there  are  other  spirits  besides  God  :  and  these  are  angels  and  the  souls 
of  men.  But  the  difference  betwixt  God  and  them  lies  here,  that  God  is  an 
infinite,  eternal,  and  unchangeable  Spirit,  and  they  are  not  so.  The  attributes 
of  God,  as  perfections  of  His  divine  nature,  are  of  two  sorts,  incommunicable 
and  communicable.  His  incommunicable  attributes,  whereof  there  is  no 
vestige  in  the  creation,  are  His  infinity,  eternity,  and  unchangeableness.  His 
communicable  attributes  again,  whereof  there  are  some  scantlings  in  the 
creatures,  are  His  being,  wisdom,  power,  holiness,  justice,  goodness,  and  truth. 
The  difference  between  these  perfections  as  they  are  in  God  and  as  they  are 
in  His  creatures,  lies  here,  that  they  are  all  infinite,  eternal,  and  imchangeable 
in  God,  but  in  His  creatures  not  so  "  (Boston). 

USE. — With  this  Question  we  are  entering  on  the  doctrinal  division  of  the 
Catechism.  Now  it  was  the  teaching  of  our  Lord  in  His  conversation 
with  the  woman  of  Samaria,  that  all  acceptable  and  profitable  worship 
must  rest  on  the  fundamental  doctrine  so  fully  set  forth  in  this  Answer. 
Our  Lord  puts  the  profoundest  of  all  doctrines  just  where  the  Catechism, 
following  His  example,  puts  it,  as  one  of  the  first  principles  of  faith  and 
worship.  And  there  is  not  one  word  in  the  statement  before  us  that  will 
not  sensibly  assist  an  intelligent  and  devout  mind  in  the  worship  of  God. 
Rightly  used,  the  Creeds  and  Catechisms  of  the  Church  are  really  devo 
tional  guides.  The  doctrines  of  Revelation  are  coals  of  heavenly  fire  on  the 
altar  of  the  religious  heart.  "The  formula,  which  embodies  a  dogma 
for  the  theologian,  readily  suggests  an  object  for  the  worshipper.  .  .  . 
Theology  may  stand  as  a  substantive  science  without  the  life  of  religion  ; 
but  religion  cannot  maintain  its  ground  without  theology  "  (Newman). 


ARE  THERE  MORE  GODS  THAN  ONE?  13 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Explain  the  metaphor  with   which   this  Answer  opens,  and  trace  its  growth  in 
Cruden.     Webster  supplies  examples  of  fifteen  senses  the  word  bears  in  English. 

2.  It  is  a  commentator's  note  on  Jer.  xxiii.   24,  The  immense  God:   derive  and 
explain. 

3.  God  is  a  most  pure  Spirit,  without  body,  parts,  or  passions  (Confession,  ii.  1). 
Reconcile  this  with  those  passages  of  Scripture  that  speak  of  God's  hands  and  feet ; 
His  eyes,  ears,  countenance,  and  heart ;  His  love,  jealousy,  sorrow,  pity,  and  repent 
ance.    Give  the  proper  theological   name  for  this  scriptural  manner  of  speech ;  and 
connect  the  whole  subject  with  the  Incarnation, 

4.  Give  the  leading  Scripture  passages  that  illustrate  the  etymological  identity  of 
health  and  holiness ;  also  the  passages  that  illustrate  the  identity  of  disease  and  sin. 


Q.  5.  Are  there  more  Gods  than  one  ? 

A.  There  is  but  One  only,  the  living  and  true  God.0 

0  Deut.  vi.  4 :  Hear,  O  Israel ;  The  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord.  Jer.  z,  10 : 
But  the  Lord  is  the  true  God,  he  is  the  living  God,  and  an  everlasting  King. 

Having  given  us  our  Lord's  definition  or  description  of  what  God  is,  and 
having  supplemented  that  definition  by  gathering  round  it  a  cluster  of  His 
scriptural  attributes,  the  Catechism  proceeds  to  ask,  God  being  such,  "Are 
there  more  Gods  than  one?"  And  the  answer  is  made,  "  There  is  but  One 
only,  the  living  and  true  God."  "Thus,"  says  an  eminent  teacher  of  Christian 
truth,  "we  must  ever  commence  in  all  our  teaching  concerning  the  Holy 
Trinity  :  we  must  not  begin  by  saying  that  there  are  Three,  and  then  go  on  to 
say  afterwards  that  there  is  One,  lest  we  give  false  notions  of  the  nature  of  that 
One  ;  but  we  must  begin  by  laying  down  the  great  truth  that  there  is  One 
God,  in  a  simple  and  strict  sense,  and  then  go  on  to  speak  of  Three,  which  is 
the  way  in  which  the  mystery  was  progressively  revealed  in  Scripture.  In  the 
Old  Testament  we  read  of  the  Unity  ;  in  the  New,  we  are  enlightened  in  the 
knowledge  of  the  Trinity."  The  Old  Testament  taught  that  "God  is  a 
Spirit,  infinite,  eternal,  and  unchangeable  in  His  being,  wisdom,  power, 
holiness,  justice,  goodness,  and  truth."  The  unity  and  spirituality  of  God 
formed  the  article  of  a  standing  or  falling  Church  in  that  early  dispensation  of 
grace  and  truth. 

One  only — "The  words  'one'  and  'only,'  ascribed  to  God  in  Scripture, 
are  not  used  in  contrast  to  the  Son  or  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  rather  with  refer 
ence  to  those  who  are  not  God,  and  are  falsely  called  so"  (Basil).  "  One,"  in 
this  connection,  is  not  used  in  the  sense  of  numeration;  it  points  to  an  absolute 
aloneness  rather  than  to  plurality  and  accumulation.  This  has  been  called  a 
transcendental  unity,  or  the  oneness  of  what  is  indivisible.  Thus  it  has  beeu 
said  :  "To  apply  arithmetical  notions  to  God  is  as  unphilosophical  as  profane. 
.  .  .  He  is  not  One  in  the  way  in  which  cre'ated  things  are  severally  units ;  for 
one,  as  applied  to  ourselves,  is  used  in  contrast  to  two  or  three  and  a  whole 
series  of  numbers.  But  God  has  not  even  such  relation  to  His  creatures  as  to 
allow,  philosophically  speaking,  of  our  contrasting  Him  with  them  "  (New 
man's  Grammar  of  Assent).  "Our  divines,  therefore,  reckon  not  God,  in 


14  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

point  of  arithmetic,  together  with  us.  They  cast  not  God  and  us  into  the 
same  numbering.  They  suffer  not  creatures  to  bear  or  sustain  the  repute  or 
account  of  numbers  after  Him,  or  when  He  is  spoken  of.  They  say  of  Him 
that  He  is  unicus  [unique],  the  only  One,  who  stands  apart  by  Himself,  out 
of  all  arithmetic,  as  His  transcendent  being  comes  not  under  our  logic  " 
(Goodwin). 

the  living  and  true  God.  Living  in  the  supreme  sense  of  having  life  in 
Himself,  and  thus  being  the  Fountain  of  life  to  all  His  creatures.  "For  in 
Him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being."  "No  name  is  so  free  from  the 
taint  of  anthropomorphism,  or  of  anything  incongruous  and  degrading,  as  the 
living  God"  (Gold win  Smith,  Bystander,  ii.  141).  And  true  as  distinguished 
from  all  false  gods.  This  doctrine  of  God  was  the  ground  of  all  the  propheti 
cal  preaching  and  controversy  in  the  Old  Testament.  "  Hear,  O  Israel,  the 
Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord  "  (see  Q.  44).  And  Paul,  treating  of  things  offered 
to  idols,  jmade  a  restatement  of  this  fundamental  position  of  the  Hebrew  and 
Christian  faith  :  "  We  know  that  an  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world,  and  that 
there  is  none  other  God  but  one.  To  us  there  is  but  one  God,  the  Father,  of 
whom  are  all  things,  and  we  in  Him." 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Explain  the  phrase,  A  true  Jew  was  a  Crypto-Ohristian. 

2.  What  is  meant  by  the  saying  of  a  Father,  Not  number  but  glory  is  expressed 
in  the  utterance,  The  Lord  God  is  one  Lord? 


Q.  6.  How  many  persons  are  there  in  the  Godhead '? 

A.  There  are  three  persons  in  the  Godhead ;  the  Father,  the 
Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost;  and  these  three  are  one  God,  the 
same  in  substance,  equal  in  power  and  glory.p 

P  Matt,  xxviii.  19  :  Go  ye  therefore,  and  teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the 
name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Familiar  to  us  as  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is,  yet  it  must  never  be  for 
gotten  what  it  cost  the  early  Church  to  bring  this  fundamental  truth  out  of  the 
Scriptures  and  get  it  inserted  in  the  Creed.  There  was  an  immense  expendi 
ture  of  learned  theological  labour  before  this  doctrine  was  finally  formulated 
and  universally  accepted  in  the  Church  of  Christ.  In  his  chapter  on  the 
Trinity,  Dr.  Hodge  maintains  that  this  doctrine  is  peculiar  to  the  religion  of 
the  Bible,  and  that,  like  all  Bible  truths,  it  is  not  an  abstract,  speculative,  and 
notional  truth,  but  is  most  fundamental  and  vital  to  the  whole  Christian  faith. 
And  he  endorses  Meyer's  words,  to  the  effect  that  "  the  Trinity  is  the  point 
in  which  all  Christian  ideas  and  interests  unite  ;  at  once  the  beginning  and  the 
end  of  all  insight  into  Christianity." 

There  are  three  persons — "  Lat.  per-sona,  a  mask  used  by  an  actor,  a 
personage,  character,  part  played  by  an  actor,  a  person.  The  large-mouthed 


HOW  MANY  PERSONS  ARE  THERE  IN  THE  GODHEAD  ?    1 5 

masks  worn  by  the  actors  were  so  called  from  the  resonance  of  the  voice 
sounding  through  them  "  (Skeat).  It  is  a  long  step  from  the  original  sense  of 
the  word  person  to  that  usage  we  are  most  familiar  with  when  it  is  applied  to 
an  individual  of  the  human  race.  But  it  is  a  still  longer  step  from  our  ordinary 
usage  of  the  word  up  to  the  scriptural  and  theological  acceptation  when 
applied  to  the  Three  in  the  Divine  Nature.  It  is  utterly  inadequate  to  set  forth 
the  manner  of  Their  subsistence,  but  the  Latin  theologians  could  find  no  better, 
no  less  inadequate  word  in  their  tongue,  and  the  modern  languages  of 
Christendom  have  not  as  yet  developed  any  more  adequate  term.  We  must 
be  content  to  call  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  PERSONS  ;  but  while  we  do 
so,  we  must  always  remember  that  They  are  utterly  unlike  any  personalities  we 
have  ever  known.  "  In  modern  philosophical  usage,  the  term  person  means  a 
separate  and  distinct  rational  individual.  But  the  Tri-personality  of  God  is 
not  a  numerical  or  essential  trinity  of  three  beings,  like  Abraham,  Isaac,  or 
Jacob,  for  this  would  be  Tritheism  ;  nor  is  it  only,  on  the  other  hand,  merely 
a  threefold  aspect  and  mode  of  manifestation  in  the  Sabellian  or  Sweden- 
borgian  sense ;  but  it  is  a  real,  objective,  and  eternal,  though  ineffable 
distinction  in  one  divine  being"  (Schaff,  Creeds,  ii.  70).  "The  scriptural 
facts  are — (a)  The  Father  says  I ;  the  Son  says  I  ;  the  Spirit  says  I.  (b)  The 
Father  says  Thou  to  the  Son,  and  the  Son  says  Thou  to  the  Father ;  and  in 
like  manner  the  Father  and  the  Son  use  the  pronouns  He  and  Him  in  refer 
ence  to  the  Spirit,  (c)  The  Father  loves  the  Son  ;  the  Son  loves  the  Father  ; 
the  Spirit  testifies  of  the  Son.  .  .  .  The  summation  of  these  and  kindred 
facts  is  expressed  in  the  proposition  :  The  one  Divine  Being  subsists  in  Three 
Persons — Father,  Son,  and  Spirit "  (Hodge).  See  the  Athanasian  Creed  and 
Calvin's  Institutes,  I.  xiii.  3-6. 

the  Godhead — "  Divinity,  divine  nature.  .  .  .  The  suffix  is  wholly  dif 
ferent  from  Eng.  -head,  being  the  same  suffix  as  that  which  is  commonly  written 
•hood.  The  etymology  is  from  A.S.  had,  office,  state,  dignity"  (Skeat). 
By  the  Godhead  is  meant  the  Divine  Nature.  And  a  Person  in  the  Godhead  is 
the  whole  Godhead  distinguished  by  "  personal  properties."  The  Godhead 
neither  is  nor  can  be  divided  into  parts ;  each  of  the  Three  Persons  hath  in 
Himself  the  one  whole  indivisible  Godhead.  But,  as  has  been  said,  they 
are  distinguished  by  their  personal  properties — that  is  to  say,  it  is  the 
personal  property  of  the  Father  to  beget  the  Son  (Heb.  i.  5)  j  and  of  the 
Son  to  be  begotten  of  the  Father  (John  i.  14) ;  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
proceed  from  the  Father  and  the  Son  (John  xv.  26 ;  Gal.  iv.  6).  "  So  the 
personal  properties  make  no  inequality  among  them  ;  forasmuch  as  these 
properties  are  not  temporary  or  accidental,  but  eternal  and  necessary,  and 
could  not  but  be  ;  and  every  one  of  the  three  persons  is  the  eternal,  the 
supreme,  and  the  most  high  God  "  (Boston).  And,  accordingly,  just  as  man 
hood  signifies  that  human  nature,  possessing  which  we  are  men,  so,  in  some 
such  way,  the  Godhead  is  that  divine  nature  which  the  three  divine  persons 
equally  possess,  and  are  therefore  equally  and  eternally  God.  In  manhood 
there  are  a  multitude  of  persons  that  no  man  can  number,  but  in  the  Godhead 
there  are  three  persons  only — Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost. 

the  Father — The  name  of  father  is  a  relative  name,  father  and  son. 
Paternity  is  a  relation  of  origin  and  production,  but  it  is  not  every  kind  of 
production  that  properly  constitutes  paternity  :  paternity  is  production  by 
generation.  Now  the  Scriptures  call  the  relation  that  eternally  obtains 
between  the  First  Person  and  the  Second,  Fatherhood  and  Sonship  j  and  they 


1 6  THE    SHORTER   CATECHISM    WITH   A    COMMENTARY. 

teach  that  it  is  originated  by  a  "  begetting  ;  "  but  here  also  all  earthly  figures 
and  phrases  utterly  fail  us  when  we  treat  of  the  Divine  Fatherhood  and 
the  Divine  Filiation.  The  Son  is  of  the  Father  ;  the  Father  is  the  Fountain 
of  His  Divine  Nature  ;  but  as  to  how  the  Son  is  generated  ; — before  questions 
like  this  reason  and  revelation  are  alike  dumb.  Still,  there  is  nothing  clearer 
in  Holy  Scripture  than  this,  that  there  is  a  Person  in  the  Divine  Nature  who 
is  constantly  spoken  of  as  the  Father,  and  Another  who  is  as  constantly 
spoken  of  as  the  Son.  The  First  Person  calls  the  Second  Person  His  Son ; 
He  treats  Him  always  as  His  Son  ;  He  sends  Him  forth  and  sustains  Him  ; 
and  He  receives  Him  back  again,  and  rewards  Him  as  His  Son.  While,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  Second  Person  calls  on  His  Father,  serves  Him,  obeys 
Him,  puts  His  trust  in  Him,  and  at  last  returns  home  to  Him.  And  this  is 
not  a  mere  economical,  conditioned,  and  figurative  relation ;  for  above  and 
apart  from  their  historical  and  redemptive  relations  to  us  at  all,  the  First 
Person  and  the  Second  are  represented  in  Scripture  as  eternally  existing 
under  the  internal  relations  of  Father  and  Son. 

the  Son — The  Son  is  set  forth  as  eternally  and  continually  "  begotten  ; " 
or,  as  an  incomprehensible  and  yet  most  vivid  Scripture  says,  He  is  "in  the 
bosom  of  the  Father."  And  this  eternal  generation  of  the  Son  is  the  ultimate 
ground  of  His  Godhead — that  is  to  say,  He  is  God  because  He  is  the  Son  of 
God ;  and  He  is  the  Son  because  He  has  His  Godhead  by  a  divine  and 
eternal  generation.  And  thus  He  is  able  to  say,  "I  and  the  Father  are 
one,"  and  also  at  the  same  time  to  say,  "The  Father  is  greater  than  I." 
One,  because  begotten  of  the  Father,  and  therefore  the  same  in  substance, 
equal  in  power  and  glory.  While  the  Father  is  the  greater,  as  being  before 
and  above  the  Son  in  order  of  existence,  and  as  being  eternally  and  con 
tinually  the  source  of  the  Godhead  and  Sonship  life.  Calvin  commends 
Augustine  for  the  following  explanation  : — "Christ,  as  to  Himself  is  called 
God,  but  as  to  the  Father  He  is  called  Son.  The  Father,  as  to  Himself  is 
called  God,  but  as  to  the  Son  He  is  called  Father.  He  who,  as  to  the  Son 
is  called  Father,  is  not  Son  ;  and  He  who,  as  to  the  Father  is  called  Son,  is 
the  same  God." 

the  Holy  Ghost— "The  Third  Person  of  the  Trinity  is  called  the  Spirit 
by  way  of  eminence,  probably  for  two  reasons  :  first,  because  He  is  the 
power  or  efficiency  of  God  ;  and  secondly,  to  express  His  relations  to  the 
other  persons  of  the  Trinity.  The  Son  is  called  the  Word  as  the  re- 
vealer  or  image  of  God,  and  the  Third  Person  is  called  Spirit  as  the  breath 
or  power  of  God.  He  is  also  called  predominantly  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  indi 
cate  both  His  nature  and  operations.  He  is  absolutely  holy  in  His  own 
nature,  and  the  cause  of  holiness  in  all  Creatures.  For  the  same  reason  He 
is  called  the  Spirit  of  Truth,  the  Spirit  of  Wisdom,  of  Peace,  of  Love,  of 
Glory"  (Hodge).  "The  Holy  Ghost  receiveth  the  same  essence  from  the 
Father  that  the  Son  receiveth,  and  thereby  becometh  the  same  God  with  the 
Father  and  the  Word ;  but  though  the  essence  be  the  same  that  is  com 
municated,  yet  there  is  a  difference  in  the  communication  :  the  Word  being 
God  by  generation,  the  Holy  Ghost  by  procession  ;  and  though  everything 
that  is  begotten  proceedeth,  yet  everything  which  proceedeth  is  not  begotten. 
Wherefore  in  the  language  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures  and  the  Church,  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  never  said  to  be  begotten,  but  to  proceed  from  the  Father ; 
nor  is  He  ever  called  the  Son,  but  the  gift  of  God  "  (Pearson). 

"  The  Spirit  of  God  bears  the  name  of  Holy  in  the  New  Testament  where 


THE   GODHEAD.  17 

His  more  special  title  is  '  the  Holy  Ghost,'  as  our  old  English  hath  rendered 
it  to  us.  But  is  not  the  Father  holy,  and  the  Son  holy,  and  Both  equally 
holy  with  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  Yes,  essentially  and  personally  holy  in  them 
selves  :  '  Holy,  Holy,  Holy/  they  are  all  proclaimed  (Isa.  vi.).  How  is  it 
then  that  He,  the  Third  Person,  should  have  the  peculiar  title  of  Holy? 
It  is  neither  in  a  peculiar,  neither  in  a  personal  or  essential  respect,  but 
relatively  unto  that  which  is  His  proper  and  peculiar  work,  because  He 
sanctifies  us  and  makes  us  holy,  and  so  merits  the  name  of  Holy  Ghost  as 
Christ  doth  of  Saviour,  and  the  Father  doth  of  Father  "  (Goodwin). 

these  three  are  one  God — "This  is  the  Catholic  faith,  that  we  worship 
one  God  in  Trinity  and  Trinity  in  Unity.  Neither  confounding  the  Persons 
nor  dividing  the  substance  "  (Athanasian  Creed). 

"  It  seems  to  me  nothing  can  be  more  admirable  than  the  words  of  Gregory 
Nazianzen  :  '  I  cannot  think  of  the  Unity  without  being  irradiated  by  the 
Trinity  :  I  cannot  distinguish  between  the  Trinity  without  being  carried  up  to 
the  Unity  '  "  (Calvin).  "  The  Father  is  the  one  simple,  entire  Divine  Being, 
and  so  is  the  Son ;  they  do  in  no  sense  share  divinity  between  them  :  each  is 
whole  God.  This  is  not  ditheism  or  tritheism,  for  they  are  the  same  God ; 
nor  is  it  Sabellianism,  for  they  are  eternally  distinct  and  substantive  Persons ; 
but  it  is  a  depth  and  height  beyond  our  intellect,  how  that  which  is  Two  in  so 
full  a  sense,  can  also  in  so  full  a  sense  be  One,  or  how  the  Divine  Nature  does 
not  come  under  number  "  (Newman's  Notes  on  Athanasius}. 

Where  all  is  mystery,  we  may  not  properly  speak  of  any  part  being  more 
mysterious ;  but  perhaps  of  all  the  mysterious  aspects  of  the  blessed  Trinity 
as  they  are  presented  to  us  in  Scripture,  the  most  mysterious  is  that  which 
has  been  called  the  Mutual  Indwelling  of  the  three  Divine  Persons.  Theology, 
both  Greek  and  Latin,  has  had  to  coin  terms  to  set  forth  this  mystery.  This 
intimate  union  was  named  by  the  Greeks  the  Perichoresis,  and  by  the 
Latins  Inhabitatio.  These  scientific  terms  were  struck  out  to  express  the 
scriptural  facts  that  the  Son  is  always  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  the 
Son  :  that  the  blessed  Three  dwell  in  each  other.  As  in  all  this  exposition 
we  here  fall  back  on  Athanasius  and  his  annotator  Dr.  Newman.  "A 
Perichoresis  of  Persons  is  implied  in  the  unity  of  substance.  This  is  the 
connection  of  the  two  texts  so  often  quoted  :  '  The  Son  is  in  the  Father, 
and  the  Father  is  in  the  Son,'  because  'the  Son  and  the  Father  are  one.' 
And  the  cause  of  this  unity  and  Perichoresis  is  the  Divine  Begetting."  "  The 
Perichoresis  was  the  test  of  orthodoxy. " 

the  same  in  substance— Substance  as  here  used  is  a  scientific  or  theo 
logical  term  ;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  not  found  in  Scripture,  but  has  had  to  be 
coined  by  scriptural  students  for  their  use,  and  for  the  service  of  the  truth. 
The  word  substance  in  its  etymology  means  that  which  in  matter  or  mind 
underlies  and  sustains  all  phenomenal  manifestation.  Popularly,  we  associate 
the  word  more  with  matter  than  with  spirit,  but  it  is  equally  suitable  and 
serviceable  as  applied  to  both.  Philosophically  taken,  substance  means  that 
in  matter  which  underlies,  and  so  to  speak  supports,  all  the  attributes  or 
qualities  of  matter.  Locke  gives  the  primary  qualities  of  matter  as  exten 
sion,  figure,  divisibility,  motion,  hardness,  softness,  fluidity.  And  accordingly 
substance,  as  its  name  implies,  is  that  mysterious  and  inaccessible  background 
which  stands  behind  and  sustains  all  these  its  qualities.  And  so  it  is  in  the 
spiritual  world.  The  substance  treated  of  in  the  Catechism  in  that  awful, 
mysterious  essence  of  which  the  qualities  are  not  extension,  or  colour,  or 

B 


1 8  THE    SHORTER    CATECHISM    WITH    A    COMMENTARY. 

figure,  or  fluidity ;  but  the  qualities  that  the  Divine  Substance  supports  are 
infinite  and  eternal  wisdom,  power,  holiness,  justice,  goodness,  and  truth. 
These  qualities  are,  so  to  speak,  the  phenomena  that  the  inscrutable  Divine 
Substance  presents  to  us.  God,  then,  as  to  His  Substance,  is  Divine  Spirit ; 
and  as  to  the  phenomena,  or  qualities,  or  attributes  of  that  uncreated,  eternal, 
Divine  Substance,  they  are  such  as  we  have  already  learned. 

It  was  for  this  phrase,  "the  same  in  substance,"  that  Athanasius  carried 
on  his  splendid  and  successful  contention  before  the  CEcumenical  Council  of 
Nice  in  the  fourth  century.  And  thus  it  is  that  Athanasius  leaves  his  mark 
on  our  own  Catechism,  as  on  all  the  symbolical  and  confessional  books  of  the 
Christian  Church  since  his  day.  He  saw  that  this  word  consubstantial,  of  one 
and  the  same  substance^  was  the  only  word  that  would  assert  without  ambiguity 
or  possibility  of  gainsaying  the  scriptural  doctrine  of  the  perfect  and  eternal 
Godhead  of  Jesus  Christ.  And  by  the  blessing  of  God  on  his  great  talents 
and  his  heroic  stand,  the  Godhead  of  our  Lord  has  ever  since  been  safely 
fixed  in  the  Church's  Creed  ;  sheltered,  so  to  speak,  under  the  shield  of  the 
consubstantiality  which  Athanasius  fashioned  and  hung  up  before  it.  By 
scriptural,  Athanasian,  Nicene  doctrine  then  we  are  taught  that  there  are 
three  Persons  in  the  Godhead,  who  are  the  same  in  substance,  and  that  that 
same  substance  sustains  in  each  Person  the  same  properties  or  attributes  of 
divine  wisdom,  power,  holiness,  justice,  goodness,  and  truth. 

equal  in  power  and  glory.  "The  divinity  of  the  Father,  and  of  the 
Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  one,  the  glory  equal,  and  the  majesty 
equal.  .  .  .  And  in  this  Trinity  there  is  nothing  prior  or  posterior,  nothing 
greater  or  less,  but  all  three  Persons  are  co-eternal  and  co-equal  in  themselves  " 
(Athanasian  Creed).  "Are  the  three  Hypostases  or  Persons  of  the  Most  Holy 
Trinity  all  of  equal  majesty?  Yes;  all  of  absolutely  equal  divine  majesty. 
The  Father  is  true  God  ;  the  Son  is  equally  true  God  ;  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
true  God  ;  but  yet  so  that  in  the  three  Persons  there  is  only  one  Tri-Personal 
God  "  (Eastern  Church  Catechism). 

"  Q.  How  doth  it  appear  that  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  are  God  equal 
with  the  Father  ? — A.  The  Scriptures  manifest  that  the  Son  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  are  equal  with  the  Father,  ascribing  unto  them  such  names,  attributes, 
works,  and  worship,  as  are  proper  to  God  only "  (Westminster  Larger 
Catechism). 

USES. — i.  "The  design  of  all  the  revelations  contained  in  the  word  of  God 
is  the  salvation  of  men.  Truth  is  in  order  to  holiness.  God  does  not 
make  known  His  being  and  attributes  to  teach  men  science,  but  to  bring 
them  to  the  saving  knowledge  of  Himself.  .  .  .  This  is  specially  true  of 
the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  "  (Hodge). 

2.  "What  will  it  avail  thee  to  dispute  profoundly  of  the  Trinity,  if  thou 
be  void  of  humility,  and  art  thereby  displeasing  to  the  Trinity  ?     Surely 
high  words  do  not  make  a  man  holy  and  just :  but  a  virtuous  life  maketh 
him  dear  to  God  "  (a  Kernpis). 

3.  "  May  we  never  speak  on  subjects  like  this  without  awe  ;  may  we  never 
dispute  without  charity  ;  may  we  never  inquire  without  a  careful  endeavour, 
with  God's  aid,  to  sanctify  our  knowledge,  and  to  impress  it  on  our  hearts, 
as  well  as  to  store  it  in  our  understandings  "  (Newman). 


THE   DECREES   OF   GOD.  19 


QUESTIONS. 

1.  Trace  the  Trinitarian  allusions  in  John  xlu.,  xv.,  xvl.,  xvif. 

2.  Explain  the  additional  clause  in  the  Larger  Catechism :  although  distinguished 
by  their  personal  properties. 

3.  Explain  Pearson's  statement:  The  Father  is  not  only  eternally,  but  originally 
God. 

4.  Explain   "Hilary's  felicitous  paradox:"  The  Father  is  the  greater  without  the 
Son  being  the  lesser. 

5.  Give  two  interpretations,  both  ancient  and  orthodox,  of  John  xiu.  28,  last  clause. 

6.  Explain  Augustine's  saying :  Go  to  the  Jordan,  and  thou  wilt  see  the  Trinity. 

7.  Explain  Canon  Bright's  saying  about  Athanasius :  His  zeal  for  the  consubstanti- 
ality  had  its  root  in  his  loyalty  to  the  Consubstantial. 

8.  Read  Trinitarian  and  Incarnation  doctrines  in  Dante's  last  vision : — 

"  In  that  abyss 

Of  radiance,  clear  and  lofty,  seem'd,  methoughr, 
Three  orbs  of  triple  hue  dipt  in  one  bound ; 
And,  from  another,  one  reflected  seem'd. 
As  rainbow  is  from  rainbow  ;  and  the  third 
Seem'd  fire,  breath'd  equally  from  both.    Oh,  speech, 
How  feeble  and  how  faint  art  thou,  to  give 
Conception  birth  !  .  .  . 
For  I  therein,  methought,  in  its  own  hue 
Beheld  our  image  painted  :  .  .  .  I  intent  to  scan 
The  novel  wonder,  and  trace  out  the  form, 
How  to  the  circle  fitted,  and  therein 
How  plac'd  :  but  the  flight  was  not  for  my  wing." 

9.  Explain  the  distinguishing  title  Holy  Ghost. 


Q.  7.    What  are  the  decrees  of  God? 

A.  The  decrees  of  God  are  his  eternal  purpose,  according  to 
the  counsel  of  his  will,  whereby,  for  his  own  glory,  he  hath  fore 
ordained  whatsoever  comes  to  pass.'* 

i  Eph.  i.  4 :  According  as  he  hath  chosen  us  in  him  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world.  Ver.  n  :  Being  predestinated  according  to  the  purpose  of  him  who 
worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  his  own  will.  Rom.  ix.  23  :  The  vessels  of 
mercy,  which  he  had  afore  prepared  unto  glory. 

The  decrees  of  God— A  decree  is  a  determination,  an  edict,  a  rule.  It 
is  an  order  from  one  having  supreme  authority,  deciding  what  is  to  be  done 
by  a  subordinate.  "The  word  decree,  or  decrees,  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is 
used  in  this  Answer,  is  not  found  in  the  New  Testament.  It  is  a  technical 
term,  adopted  by  theologians  to  convey  a  complex  idea  ;  that  is,  to  convey  a 
number  of  ideas  by  a  single  term.  The  express  design  of  the  answer  is  to 
explain  this  term,  and  it  is  done  almost  wholly  in  the  words  of  inspiration  " 
(Green's  Lectures],  "  The  Scripture  speaks  of  God's  decrees,  condescending 
therein  to  the  conceptions  of  men.  .  .  .  Yet,  what  is  in  man  imperfectly, 


20  THE    SHORTER    CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

is  to  be  looked  on  as  an  image  of  God's  proceedings  herein,  in  a  transcendent 
way  of  perfection  "  (Goodwin).  "  God  does  not  do  what  He  does,  nor  order 
what  He  orders,  accidentally  and  unawares  ;  either  'without  or  beside  His 
intention.  And  if  there  be  a  foregoing  design  of  doing  and  ordering  as 
He  does,  this  is  the  same  with  a  purpose  or  decree"  (Edwards).  "The 
consideration  of  this  great  doctrine  runs  up  into  the  most  profound  and 
inaccessible  subjects  that  can  occupy  the  minds  of  men, — the  nature  and 
attributes,  the  purposes  and  actings,  of  the  infinite  and  incomprehensible 
Jehovah, — viewed  especially  in  their  bearings  upon  the  everlasting  destinies 
of  His  intelligent  creatures.  .  .  .  Many  men  have  indulged  in  the  most 
presumptuous  and  irreverent  speculation  concerning  it.  There  is  probably 
no  subject  that  has  occupied  more  of  the  attention  of  intelligent  men  in  every 
age.  .  .  .  All  that  the  highest  ability,  ingenuity,  and  acuteness  can  effect 
has  been  brought  to  bear  upon  the  discussion  of  this  subject ;  but  the 
difficulties  attaching  to  it  have  never  been  solved,  and  we  are  well  warranted 
in  saying  that  they  never  will,  unless  either  God  give  us  a  fuller  revelation, 
or  greatly  enlarged  capacities, — although,  perhaps,  it  would  be  more  correct 
to  say,  that,  from  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  a  finite  being  can  never  fully 
comprehend  it,  since  this  would  imply  that  he  could  fully  comprehend  the 
infinite  mind "  (Cunningham).  Archbishop  Leighton  maintains  that  the 
utterances  of  the  Catechism  on  the  divine  decrees  are  worthy  of  the  subject : 
few,  sober,  clear,  and  certain. 

his  eternal  purpose — "The  second  point  included  in  this  doctrine  is, 
that  the  decrees  of  God  are  all  reducible  to  one  purpose.  .  .  .  They  are  not 
successively  formed  as  the  emergency  arises,  but  are  all  parts  of  one  all- 
comprehending  plan.  .  .  .  As,  however,  this  one  purpose  includes  an 
indefinite  number  of  events,  and  as  these  events  are  mutually  related,  we 
therefore  speak  of  the  decrees  of  God  as  many,  and  as  having  a  certain  order  " 
(Hodge). 

the  counsel  of  his  will — "You  know  counsel  referreth  to  the  understand 
ing,  to  the  judgment.  It  is  a  considering  what  one  meaneth  to  do,  how  to 
do  it,  and  to  do  it  the  best  way,  and  most  wisely  :  that  is  properly  counsel. 
There  is  something  in  counsel  which  is  in  man  which  must  not  be  attributed 
unto  God,  and  something  in  man  which  may  be  attributed  unto  God  :  for 
we  must  cut  off  all  imperfection  in  what  we  attribute  unto  God.  There  are 
two  things  in  counsel  in  a  man.  There  is,  first,  a  discourse  and  inquiry 
which  is  best ;  he  setteth  his  reason  a- work,  and  one  thought  cometh  in 
after  another.  And  then  there  is,  secondly,  a  judgment,  \vhen  he  hath 
considered  all,  which  is  best.  Now,  the  first  part  we  must  cut  off  from 
God  ;  He  doth  not  advise  and  deliberate  as  men  do,  to  take  this  thing,  or 
that  thing,  one  after  another,  by  way  of  inquiry  into  His  mind.  No,  for 
known  unto  God  are  all  His  works  from  eternity.  How  then  is  counsel 
attributed  unto  God  ?  Thus  :  that  which  is  the  result,  that  which  ariseth  in 
men's  minds  or  judgments  out  of  inquiry,  a  mature  pitching  upon  what  is  best  . 
this  view,  which  is  the  perfection  of  counsel,  which  is  the  ripening  and 
maturing  of  it,  this  is  attributed  unto  God.  This  is  certain  judicium,  a  certain 
judgment  of  what  is  best  to  do  "  (Goodwin). 

for  his  own  glory — "The  general  end  of  God's  external  working  is  the 
exercise  of  His  most  glorious  and  most  abundant  virtues.  .  .  .  Not  that 
anything  is  made  to  be  beneficial  unto  Him,  but  all  things  for  Him  to  show 
beneficence  and  grace  in  them  "  (Hooker).  See  Question  I. 


THE   WORK   OF   CREATION.  21 

whatsoever  comes  to  pass.  With  this  proviso,  which  is  given  in  Hodge's 
words  :  "  The  decretive  and  the  preceptive  will  of  God  can  never  be  in 
conflict.  God  never  decrees  to  do,  or  to  cause  others  to  do,  what  He  forbids. 
He  permits  men  to  sin,  although  sin  is  forbidden.  But  God  cannot  decree 
to  make  men  sin."  See  Question  13. 

USES.—  i.  "  Even  so,  Thou,  Father,  hast  ordained 

Thy  high  decree  to  stand  ; 
Nor  men  nor  angels  may  presume 
The  reason  to  demand." — PAR.  xxxiv.  3. 

2.  "The   doctrine   of  this  high  mystery  is  to  be  handled  with  special 
prudence  and  care  "  (Confession).    And  Turretine  maintains  that  it  should 
be  taught,  yet  he  says  it  is  a  subject  more  proper  for  the  school  than  the 
pulpit. 

3.  "Doth  God  work  all  things  according  to  His  will?     Then  give  up  thy 
will  to  Him.      'It  is  not  in  man,'  saith  Jeremiah,  'to  direct  his  steps.' 
It  is  God  that  must  direct  them  for  thee,  for  He  works  all  things  accord 
ing  to  His  will.     If  any  man  in  the  world,  if  his  understanding  and  will 
were  a  rule  to  mine,  and  I  knew  he  were  infallible,  I  would  certainly 
go  give  up  all  my  ways  to  what  he  saith.     As  you  say  you  must  be  ruled 
by  him  who  bears  the  purse,  so  you  must  be  ruled  by  him  who  bears  the 
understanding.     Certainly,  if  any  man  hath  an  infallible  understanding, 
I   will   be   ruled   by  him.     God   hath  :  He  works  all  things,    and  all 
effectually,  by  the  counsel  of  His  own  will.     Therefore  in  all  thy  ways 
give  up  thyself  to  Him  "  (Goodwin). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Explain  the  phrase,  Confession,  Hi.  1 :  liberty  or  contingency  of  second  causes. 

2.  Compare  2  Pet.  i.  10  with  Confession,  ///'.  8. 


Q.  8.  How  doth  God  execute  his  decrees  ? 

A.  God  executeth  his  decrees  in  the  works  of  creation  and 
providence. 

Q.  9.    What  is  the  work  of  creation  ? 

A.  The  work  of  creation  is  God's  making  all  things  of  nothing, 
by  the  word  of  his  power,  in  the  space  of  six  days,  and  all  very 
good.r 

r  Gen.  i.  throughout.  Heb.  xi.  3 :  Through  faith  we  understand  that  the 
worlds  were  framed  by  the  word  of  God,  so  that  things  which  are  seen  were  not 
made  of  things  which  do  appear. 

creation— The  act  of  creating  :  especially  the  divine  act  of  bringing  all 
things  beyond  the  Divine  Nature  into  existence.  "In  the  beginning  God 
created  the  heavens  and  the  earth." 


22  THE    SHORTER   CATECHISM    WITH    A    COMMENTARY. 

"  Chaos  heard  His  voice  :  him  all  his  train 
Followed  in  bright  succession  to  behold 
Creation,  and  the  wonders  of  His  might." — MILTON. 

"  In  brief,  all  things  are  artificial ;  for  Nature  is  the  art  of  God  "  (Rellgio 
Medici}. 

out  of  nothing — "  The  clause  '  out  of  nothing '  is  vital  in  defining  a 
creative  act "  (Shedd).  This  is  directed  against  those  ancient  heathen  specula 
tions  which  taught  that  matter  was  eternal  :  that  there  were  two  necessary  and 
eternal  beings,  God  and  matter.  But  it  is  the  teaching  of  the  Bible  and  of 
the  Catechism  that  there  is  only  one  necessary  and  eternal  Being,  and  that  He 
is  the  absolute  Creator  of  everything  beyond  Himself.  On  Rom.  xi.  36, 
Goodwin  remarks:  "Not  so  much  as  a  first  matter  was  existing  to  His 
hands."  And  in  his  extraordinarily  able  and  suggestive  treatise,  Of  the 
Creatures,  he  says  :  "All  things  were  once  nothing,  and  all  afflictions  and 
miseries  are  smaller  vacillations  or  reelings  of  the  creatures  toward  their  first 
nothing.  .  .  .  The  whole  creation  is  built  upon  a  quagmire  of  nothing,  and 
is  continually  ready  to  sink  into  it,  and  to  be  swallowed  up  by  it,  which 
maketh  the  whole  or  any  part  of  it  to  quake  and  quiver  when  God  is  angry, 
as  Jeremiah  then  did  (x.  24)." 

"  The  Divine  Father,  by  the  strange  fecundity  of  His  omnipotent  power, 
first  made  the  clay  out  of  nothing,  and  then  made  man  out  of  that "  (Pearson). 
For  a  refutation  of  the  Aristotelian  maxim,  that  out  of  nothing  nothing  can 
be  produced,  see  Pearson,  Art.  i. 

in  the  space  of  six  days— See  Cruden's  analysis  under  day. 

"According  to  the  commonly  received  chronology,  our  globe  has  existed 
only  a  few  thousand  years.  According  to  geologists,  it  must  have  existed  for 
countless  ages.  And  again,  according  to  the  generally  received  interpretation 
of  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis,  the  process  of  creation  was  completed  in  six 
days  ;  whereas  geology  teaches  that  it  must  have  been  in  progress  through 
periods  of  time  that  cannot  be  computed.  ...  It  is  of  course  admitted  that, 
taking  this  account  by  itself,  it  would  be  most  natural  to  understand  the  word 
day  in  its  ordinary  sense ;  but  if  that  sense  brings  the  Mosaic  account  into 
conflict  with  facts,  and  another  sense  avoids  such  conflict,  then  it  is  obligatory 
on  us  to  adopt  that  other.  Now  it  is  urged  that  if  the  word  '  day  '  be  taken 
in  the  sense  of  '  an  indefinite  period  of  time,'  a  sense  which  it  undoubtedly 
has  in  other  parts  of  Scripture,  there  is  not  only  no  discrepancy  between  the 
Mosaic  account  of  the  creation  and  the  assumed  facts  of  geology,  but  there 
is  a  marvellous  coincidence  between  them  "  (Hodge). 

"  Immediate  are  the  acts  of  God,  more  swift 
Than  time  or  motion :  but  to  human  ears 
Cannot  without  process  of  speech  be  told  ; 
So  told  as  earthy  notion  can  receive." — MILTON. 

all  very  good.  Manes  (whence  Manichaeism),  a  Persian  philosopher,  taught 
the  dualistic  doctrine  of  creation.  He  held  that  there  are  two  eternal 
principles  or  powers,  the  one  good  and  the  other  evil  j  and  that  all  creation, 
visible  and  invisible,  material  and  spiritual,  has  sprung  from  those  two 
sources.  Those  two  sources,  so  ran  the  dualistic  doctrine,  were  eternally 
and  essentially  contrary  the  one  to  the  other,  wherefore  they  were  named 
light  and  darkness,  good  and  evil,  God  and  matter.  This  doctrine  worked 
much  mischief  in  patristic  times :  Augustine's  early  life  was  devoted  to  its 


THE   CREATION   OF   MAN.  23 

promulgation,  and  the  doctrines  he  preached  were  only  too  well  illustrated  in 
his  life.  The  Bible  doctrine  of  creation  overturns  all  such  speculation. 
"The  being  of  God  is  a  kind  of  law  to  His  working:  for  that  perfection 
which  God  is  giveth  perfection  to  that  He  doth  "  (Hooker). 

USE.— Butler  says  that  the  Scriptures  begin  with  an  account  of  God's 
creation  of  the  world  and  man  in  order  to  acquaint  man  with  his  origin, 
and  to  enable  him  to  trace  his  life  and  preservation  to  his  Creator,  and  to 
connect  all  men  with  Him  of  whom  the  whole  book  treats,  and  of  whose 
laws  and  revelations  the  whole  book  is  full.  The  history  of  creation  has 
not  been  written  to  make  scientific  research  superfluous,  but  to  guide 
learned  and  simple  to  religious  contemplation  and  thought  on  nature  and 
their  own  creation  and  preservation. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Derive  Manichceism,  and  explain  the  doctrine. 

2.  Give  a  catena  of  passages  to  prove    that  it  was  the  Son  who  mediated  the 
creation. 


Q.  10.  How  did  God  create  man? 

A.  God  created  man  male  and  female,  after  his  own  image,  in 
knowledge,  righteousness,  and  holiness,  with  dominion  over  the 
creatures.8 

8  Gen.  i.  26  :  And  God  said.  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our  like 
ness  ;  and  let  them  have  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and  over  the  fowl  of  the 
air,  and  over  the  cattle,  and  over  all  the  earth,  and  over  every  creeping  thing  that 
creepeth  upon  the  earth.  Ver.  27  :  So  God  created  man  in  his  own  image,  in  the 
image  of  God  created  he  him  ;  male  and  female  created  he  them.  Ver.  28  :  And 
God  blessed  them,  and  God  said  unto  them,  Be  fruitful,  and  multiply,  and 
replenish  the  earth,  and  subdue  it ;  and  have  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea, 
and  over  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  over  every  living  thing  that  moveth  upon  the 
earth.  Col.  iii.  10 :  And  have  put  on  the  new  man,  which  is  renewed  in  know 
ledge  after  the  image  of  him  that  created  him.  Eph.  iv.  24  :  And  that  ye  put  on 
the  new  man,  which  after  God  is  created  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness. 

God  created  man — As  if  to  mark  off  and  signalize  the  creation  of  man 
from  that  of  all  the  other  creatures,  there  is  a  striking  change  in  the  manner 
in  which  the  sixth  day's  work  is  recorded.  Hitherto  the  Creator  had  spoken 
"by  the  word  of  His  power,"  and  all  things  immediately  became  as  He 
commanded.  But  when  we  are  introduced  to  the  work  of  the  sixth  day, 
we  discover  a  remarkable  modification  in  the  narrative  ;  and  instead  of  a 
creative  command,  as  on  the  preceding  days,  there  is  heard  the  language  rather 
of  counsel,  deliberation,  and  resolution.  The  Creator  now  speaks  as  if  a 
work  was  about  to  be  wrought  altogether  distinct  from,  and  immeasurably 
superior  to,  all  that  had  hitherto  been  made.  For  God  said  :  "Let  us  make 
man  in  our  image,  after  our  likeness  :  ...  So  God  created  man  in  His 
own  image,  in  the  image  of  God  created  He  him  :  male  and  female  created 
He  them. "  And  with  more  detail  in  another  place  :  "The  Lord  God  formed 
man  of  the  dust  of  the  ground,  and  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of 


24  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM    WITH   A    COMMENTARY. 

life  ;  and  man  became  a  living  soul."  All  which  produces  on  the  reader,  and 
must  have  been  intended  to  produce,  the  impression  that  man  by  his  peculiar 
creation  is  separated  off  on  all  sides  from  connection  with  the  rest  of  the 
creatures,  except  as  completing  them  and  being  their  monarch  and  their 
end.  In  the  posture  of  deliberation  and  mutual  counsel  in  which  God 
reveals  Himself  when  proceeding  to  create  mankind  ;  in  His  so  signally 
connecting  mankind  with  the  Godhead  through  putting  man  in  possession  of 
the  Divine  Image  ;  and  in  the  royal,  and,  so  to  speak,  divine  position  He 
gave  Adam  over  all  the  rest  of  creation — in  all  this  there  was  secured  for 
man  a  clear  and  indubitable  charter  of  his  divine  origin  and  heavenly 
relationship. 

man — "  The  sense  is  thinking  animal,  from  Sanskrit  man,  to  think ;  the 
animal  with  mind"  (Skeat). 

after  his  own  image — An  image  is  any  imitation,  resemblance,  or  simili 
tude  of  another  thing.  It  is  anything  drawn,  painted,  sculptured,  or  otherwise 
fashioned  to  represent  some  person  or  thing.  And  such  is  the  capacity  of  the 
word  "  image,"  that  it  is  applied  in  a  great  number  of  senses,  and  is  put  to 
a  great  variety  of  uses,  one  of  the  noblest  of  which  we  are  now  to  elucidate. 
There  was  a  twofold  act  or  process  in  the  creation  of  man  ;  and  accordingly 
two  substances  enter  into  his  complex  constitution.  "The  Lord  God  formed 
man  of  the  dust  of  the  ground,  and  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life ; 
and  man  became  a  living  soul."  Now  in  searching  in  man  for  the  divine 
image  that  was  impressed  upon  him  in  his  creation,  we  at  once  pass  beyond 
all  that  in  man  which  was  "  made  of  the  dust  of  the  ground."  For  no  forma 
tion  of  dust,  not  even  when  it  is  refined  and  elaborated  into  flesh  and  blood, 
can  carry  an  impression  of  the  image  of  God.  It  is  not  therefore  in  man's 
body,  erect,  noble,  fair,  beaming  with  intelligence  and  girded  with  strength 
as  it  is,  that  the  divine  image  stands ;  but  in  his  soul,  in  his  mind  and 
conscience  and  heart,  or  as  the  Catechism  has  it,  in  his  "knowledge, 
righteousness,  and  holiness."  At  the  same  time,  the  doctrine  of  the  divine 
image  in  man  cannot  now  be  fully  and  thoroughly  studied  in  Adam  :  we 
must  see  it  preserved  and  exhibited  in  a  yet  greater  than  he,  if  we  would 
understand  it  even  as  it  originally  existed  in  him.  We  must  go  above  Adam 
to  Him  who  made  him,  to  Him  who  is  eternally  "the  express  image  of  the 
Father's  person."  Indeed,  most  that  we  know  of  Adam's  state  before  his  fall, 
we  learn  afterwards  from  the  provision  made  in  the  "second  Adam  "  to  restore 
and  reinstate  man  in  his  lost  knowledge,  righteousness,  holiness,  and  dominion. 

"So  then  after  all  the  other  things,  Moses  says  that  man  was  made  in  the 
image  and  likeness  of  God.  And  he  says  well,  for  nothing  that  is  born  on  the 
earth  is  more  resembling  God  than  man.  And  let  no  one  think  that  he  is 
able  to  judge  of  this  likeness  from  the  character  of  the  body ;  for  neither  is 
God  a  being  with  the  form  of  a  man,  nor  is  the  human  body  like  the  form  of 
God,  but  the  resemblance  is  spoken  of  with  reference  to  the  most  important  part 
of  the  soul,  namely,  the  mind.  .  .  .  But  as  it  is  not  every  image  that  resembles 
its  archetypal  model,  since  many  are  unlike,  Moses  has  shown  this  by  adding 
to  the  words,  '  after  His  image '  the  expression,  '  in  His  likeness,'  to  prove 
that  it  means  an  accurate  impression,  having  a  clear  and  evident  resemblance 
in  form"  (Philo  :  a  contemporary  of  our  Lord). 

And  in  a  very  remarkable  fragment  of  his  lost  works  the  same  writer  says : 
"  Why,  then,  does  God  use  the  expression,  '  In  the  image  of  God  made  I  man,' 
as  if  He  were  speaking  of  that  of  some  other  God,  and  not  of  having  made 


THE   IMAGE   OF   GOD   IN    MAN.  25 

him  in  the  likeness  of  Himself?  This  expression  is  used  with  great  beauty  and 
wisdom.  For  it  was  impossible  that  anything  mortal  should  be  made  in  the 
likeness  of  the  Most  High  God,  the  Father  of  the  universe  ;  but  it  could  only 
be  made  in  the  likeness  of  the  Second  God,  who  is  the  Word  of  the  other  ;  for 
it  was  fitting  that  the  rational  type  in  the  soul  of  man  should  receive  the 
impression  of  the  Word  of  God." 

"  Spirits  only  are  made  in  God's  image,  as  if  of  His  race,  or  as  children  of 
His  house,  since  they  only  can  serve  Him  freely,  and  knowingly  act  in  imita 
tion  of  the  Divine  Nature.  One  spirit  alone  is  worth  more  than  a  whole 
world,  since  it  not  only  expresses  that  world,  but  knows  it  also,  and  is 
governed  in  it  as  God  orders.  So  that  it  seems,  that  whilst  every  substance 
expresses  the  universe,  other  substances  express  the  world  rather  than  God, 
but  spirits  express  God  rather  than  the  world "  (Leibnitz ;  see  Howe's 
Blessedness  of  the  Righteous,  chap.  iv.). 

in  knowledge — In  man  as  he  came  from  the  hand  of  God,  there  was  a 
rich  fountain  of  knowledge  springing  up  within  him.  There  was  in  him  a 
deep  well  of  intuitional  truth,  which  secretly  filled  his  understanding,  and 
heart,  and  conscience.  God  has  all  knowledge  by  intuition,  by  direct  and 
immediate  vision  ;  and  He  made  man  in  His  own  image  in  this  respect,  that 
man  had  immediately  and  intuitionally  a  knowledge  of  God,  and  duty,  and 
doubtless  of  many  other  things  that  we  now  have  to  toil  painfully  after  if  we 
would  attain  to  it.  Men  learned  in  the  matters  of  the  mind  assure  us  that  there 
is  still  a  deep  well  of  intuitional  truth,  a  fountain  of  innate  ideas  that  opens 
spontaneously  in  every  human  soul.  Our  father  Adam  drank  of  this  well, 
and  spite  of  all  that  has  been  done  to  choke  it,  it  still  rises  within  the  soul. 
The  Light  that  shone  so  fully  on  Adam  at  his  creation,  still  lighteth  every  man 
that  cometh  into  the  world.  "Adam's  heart  was  the  common  ark  of  man 
kind,  and  though  the  tables  be  lost,  yet  our  ignorance  doth  not  make  the 
law  of  none  effect.  For  the  law  of  nature  for  ever  binds  ;  that  is,  all  that  was 
written  in  Adam's  heart,  because  it  was  thereby  then  published  in  him,  and 
to  him  for  us  "  (Goodwin). 

righteousness — In  etymology  and  in  fact,  righteousness  means  rectitude, 
obedience.  Righteousness  is  a  relation,  a  relation  of  conformity  in  all  respects 
to  the  law  under  which  any  one  is  made  subject.  And  accordingly  the  text 
teaches  that  man  was  created  in  the  most  perfect  conformity  to  the  moral 
law,  under  which  as  a  creature  of  God  he  was  for  ever  to  live.  Measured 
immediately  on  his  creation  by  that  divine  law,  man  was  pronounced  by  His 
Maker  and  Lawgiver  and  Judge  "very  good."  It  is  in  this  sense  that  our 
divines  speak  of  Adam's  "natural  justification." 

and  holiness — For  the  root  and  original  meaning  of  this  noble  and  inward 
word,  see  Answer  4. 

Man's  original  righteousness  and  holiness  corresponded  somewhat  to  his 
justification  and  sanctification  in  his  redeemed  and  evangelical  estate.  His 
holiness,  if  it  is  possible  to  say  so,  was  something  more  personal,  more 
inward,  and  more  spiritual  than  even  his  righteousness.  His  holiness  was, 
and  was  to  be,  the  hidden  root  of  his  outward  righteousness ;  his  root  and 
sap  and  fatness  as  a  tree  of  righteousness,  the  planting  of  the  Lord.  He 
would  stand  in  righteousness,  in  fruitfulness,  and  in  acceptance  only  as  his 
holiness  was  preserved  unimpaired  and  untainted.  Bengel  seems  to  favour 
this  distinction  when  he  says  that  righteousness  corresponds  to  the  Divine 


26  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

Will ;  holiness,  as  it  were,  to  the  whole  of  the  Divine  Nature.  "  The  parts  of 
the  image  of  God  impressed  on  man's  soul  were  knowledge  on  his  mind, 
righteousness  on  his  will,  and  holiness  on  his  affections "  (Boston).  On 
what  it  is  that  constitutes  holiness,  see  a  characteristically  clear  and 
powerful  discussion  in  Jonathan  Edwards'  Religious  Affections,  Part  iii. 
sect.  iii. 

dominion  over  the  creatures.  This  last  feature  or  accompaniment  of  the 
Divine  Image  is  borrowed  in  as  many  words  from  God's  fatherly  and 
"  prolifical  benediction"  pronounced  over  Adam  and  Eve:  "And  God 
blessed  them,  and  said  unto  them,  Be  fruitful,  and  multiply,  and  replenish  the 
earth,  and  subdue  it  ;  and  have  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and  over 
the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  over  every  living  thing  that  moveth  upon  the  earth" 
(see  Ps.  viii.). 

"  God  appointed  man  lord  of  the  world,  and  this  authority  was  given  to 
Adam's  posterity  as  well  as  to  himself.  And  hence  we  infer  what  was  the  end 
for  which  all  things  were  created,  namely,  that  none  of  the  conveniences  and 
necessaries  of  life  should  be  wanting  to  man.  In  the  very  order  of  the 
creation  the  paternal  solicitude  of  God  for  man  is  conspicuous,  because  he 
furnished  the  world  with  all  things  needful,  and  even  with  an  immense  pro 
fusion  of  wealth,  before  he  formed  man.  Thus  man  was  rich  before  he  was 
born.  But  if  God  had  such  care  for  us  before  we  existed,  He  will  by  no 
means  leave  us  destitute  of  food  and  other  necessaries  of  life,  now  that  He  has 
placed  us  in  this  world.  And  if  He  often  keeps  His  hand  closed  toward  us, 
to  what  is  this  to  be  imputed  but  to  our  sins? "  (Calvin). 

USES. — i.  "  If  a  man  should  be  able  to  assent  to  this  doctrine  as  he  ought, 
that  we  are  all  sprung  from  God,  I  suppose  that  he  would  never  have  any 
ignoble  or  mean  thought  about  himself.  Many  incline  to  their  kinship 
with  the  animals,  which  is  miserable  and  mortal,  and  some  few  to  their 
kinship  with  the  gods,  which  is  divine  and  happy.  See  then  that  through 
this  kinship  with  the  flesh  you  do  not  become  savage,  and  bestial,  and 
untamed  "  (Epictetus). 

2.  Every  case  of  conversion  is  a  new  act  of  creation.      "  We  are  His 
workmanship  created  in  Christ  Jesus." 

3.  Every  thought,  word,  and  deed  of  sin  strikes  at  the  image  of  Christ  in 
the  soul. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Explain  the  Patristic  saying:  Adam  was  an  image  of  the  Image;  also  Milton's 
phrase,  Man,  God's  latest  image  (io.  567). 

2.  Explain  the   reference  in  the  notes:  Adam's  heart  was  the  common  ark  of 
mankind. 

3.  Adam  was  set  up  as  our  great  protoplast  and  representative :  derive  proto 
plast,  and  cf.  1  Tim.  ii.  13;  Wisd.  vii.  1. 

4.  Derive  and  distinguish  righteousness  and  holiness.    Explain  Dr.  Hodge's  words: 
Holiness  was  not  an  attribute  of  Adam's  nature,  but  an  accident. 

5.  Commit  to  memory  Dr.   South's  famous  utterance:  We  may  guess  of  the  state- 
liness  of  the  building  from  the  magnificence  of  the  ruins.     An  Aristotle  was  but 
the  rubbish  of  an  Adam,  and  Athens  but  the  rudiments  of  Paradise 


GOD'S  WORKS  OF  PROVIDENCE.  27 

Q.  1 1.   What  are  God's  works  of  providence  ? 

A.  God's  works  of  providence  are  his  most  holy/  wise,u  and 
powerful  preserving7  and  governing  all  his  creatures  and  all  their 
actions.w 

*  Ps.  cxlv.  17  :  The  Lord  is  righteous  in  all  his  ways,  and  holy  in  all  his  works. 

u  Ps.  civ.  24  :  O  Lord,  how  manifold  are  thy  works  !  in  wisdom  hast  thou  made 
them  all :  the  earth  is  full  of  thy  riches.  Isa.  xxviii.  29  :  This  also  cometh  forth 
from  the  Lord  of  hosts,  which  is  wonderful  in  counsel,  and  excellent  in  working. 

v  Heb.  i.  3  :  Upholding  all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power. 

w  Ps.  ciii.  19  :  The  Lord  hath  prepared  his  throne  in  the  heavens  ;  and  his 
kingdom  ruleth  over  all.  Matt.  x.  29  :  Are  not  two  sparrows  sold  for  a  farthing? 
and  one  of  them  shall  not  fall  on  the  ground  without  your  Father.  Ver.  30  :  But 
the  very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered.  Ver.  31  :  Fear  ye  not  therefore,  ye 
are  of  more  value  than  many  sparrows. 

providence — The  word  providence  belongs  to  a  large  and  well-known 
family  of  English  words.  The  idea  that  lies  under  them  all  is  that  of  fore 
sight  :  foreseeing  what  is  coming,  and  making  due  provision  for  it.  The  term 
providence  can  scarcely  be  claimed  as  a  scriptural  word  ;  the  almost  exclusive 
appropriation  of  the  word  to  a  sacred  use  is  later  than  our  translation,  but  it 
is  already  put  to  its  present  high  religious  use  in  Paradise  Lost.  In  the  noble 
invocation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  at  the  commencement  of  his  first  book,  Milton 
says  : — 

"  What  in  me  is  dark, 

Illumine  ;  what  is  low,  raise  and  support ; 

That  to  the  height  of  this  great  argument 

I  may  assert  Eternal  Providence, 

And  justify  the  ways  of  God  to  men. 

This  is  the  loftiest  sense  the  word  ever  bears ;  it  occurs  in  a  more  familiar 
sense  at  the  close  of  the  same  work  : — 

"  The  world  was  all  before  them  where  to  choose 
Their  place  of  rest,  and  Providence  their  guide." 

According  to  the  definition  supplied  by  the  Catechism,  God's  works  of 
providence  embrace  two  distinct  functions,  preserving  all  His  creatures,  and 
governing  all  His  creatures  and  all  their  actions,  both  functions  being  fulfilled 
with  divine  holiness,  wisdom,  and  power. 

preserving — "Providence  must  extend  itself  as  large  as  creation.  For 
what  is  providence  but  a  continuance  of  creation ;  a  preservation  of  those 
things  in  being  that  God  hath  given  to  have  a  being  "  (Sibbes). 

But  Dr.  Hodge,  one  of  the  ablest  of  our  Calvinistic  divines,  says  :  "  Creation, 
preservation,  and  government  are  in  fact  different,  and  to  identify  them  leads 
not  only  to  confusion  but  to  error.  Creation  and  preservation  differ — first,  as 
the  former  is  the  calling  into  existence  of  what  did  not  exist,  and  the  latter  is 
continuing,  or  causing  to  continue,  what  already  has  a  being  ;  and  secondly, 
in  creation  there  is  and  can  be  no  co-operation,  but  in  preservation  there  is  a 
concursus  of  the  first,  with  second  causes.  In  the  Bible,  therefore,  the  two 
things  are  never  confounded.  God  created  all  things,  and  by  Him  all  things 
consist." 


28  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

governing — Steering,  directing,  ruling,  from  Lat.  gubernare,  to  steer  a  ship. 
"It  is  true  indeed  that  Plato  seems  to  acknowledge  a  certain  plastic  or 
methodical  nature  in  the  universe,  subordinate  to  the  Deity,  or  the  Perfect 
Mind,  which  is  the  supreme  Governor  of  all  things  "  (Cudworth). 

all  his  creatures— All  His  creatures  are  embraced  in  God's  works  of 
providence ;  but  all  are  not  capable  of  receiving  and  sustaining  the  same 
degree  of  care  and  rule.  As  we  rise  in  the  scale  of  creation,  it  is  clear  that 
more  and  more  care  and  rule  is  needed  to  preserve  and  govern  the  nobler 
creatures.  Hence  it  is  put  as  a  special  section  of  the  Confession,  that  as  "the 
providence  of  God  doth,  in  general,  reach  to  all  creatures  ;  so,  after  a  special 
manner,  it  taketh  care  of  the  Church,  and  disposeth  all  things  to  the  good 
thereof." 

and  all  their  actions.  The  truth  as  so  stated  is  too  high  for  us.  It  is  too 
stupendous  a  thought.  We  cannot  picture  it  in  our  imagination.  We  receive 
it  on  the  testimony  of  Scripture,  but  we  cannot  reason  it  out  in  a  thesis  so  as 
to  compel  all  men's  assent,  and  reverence,  and  trust.  It  has  never  been  by 
reasoning  that  these  awful  truths  have  possessed  the  heart,  and  conscience,  and 
imagination  and  will  of  man.  We  must  ourselves,  one  by  one,  believingly 
and  with  a  filial  heart,  live  under  God's  providences  in  order  to  realize  them 
aright.  But  by  this  means  we  come  as  life  goes  on  to  amass  an  amount  of 
evidence  that  no  unbelief  or  doubt  can  suffice  to  gainsay.  When  we  are  so 
brought  under  the  power  of  this  great  truth,  it  is  with  daily  increasing  awe, 
wonder,  and  expectation  that  we  watch  God's  providence  preserving  and 
governing  us ;  His  searching,  penetrating,  and  discriminating  dealings  with 
ourselves  become  a  daily  worship  and  solemn  joy  to  us.  It  seems  sometimes 
as  if  all  other  lives  were  preserved  and  governed  for  our  good,  for  our  trial 
and  temptation,  for  our  probation  and  benefit,  for  our  reward  or  punishment ; 
so  completely  may  we  come  under  this  great  law  of  God's  government,  that 
we  shall  seem  to  ourselves  to  be  the  very  centre  of  all  God's  providential  deal 
ings,  a  centre  towards  which  "  all  things  work  together  for  good."  It  is  not 
so  much  by  a  dialectic,  and  philosophical,  and  theological  mind  that  these 
things  are  apprehended  ;  it  is  in  the  quick  and  responsive  conscience,  and  in 
the  new  and  ever  wakeful  heart,  that  God  makes  the  clearest  discoveries  of 
His  holy  providences.  "  I  thank  Thee,  O  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and 
earth,  because  Thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  hast 
revealed  them  unto  babes." 

USES. — I.  A  great  lesson  lies  for  us  in  the  very  etymology  of  the  leading 
word.  It  speaks  to  us  of  One  who  sees  our  way  before  we  have  trode 
it.  One  moreover  who  has  taken  on  Himself  to  provide  all  we  need  as 
we  travel  the  way  He  has  appointed  us.  Even  the  heathen  world  had 
some  hold  of  this  truth,  and  hence  the  most  thoughtful  and  devout 
among  them  taught  and  practised  augury  and  divination,  grounding 
their  inquiries  into  the  mind  and  will  of  God  on  the  assurance  that 
He  had  a  mind  and  purpose  about  every  man  and  his  lot  and  way  in 
life.  And  thus  Paul  speaks  to  the  Athenians  of  all  nations  seeking 
God,  if  haply  they  might  find  Him.  The  doctrines  and  the  experience 
of  Providence  have  taught  us  that  God  is  not  far  from  any  one  of  us, 
for  in  Him  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being. 

2.  For  those  who  say  they  are  waiting  on  providence  to  discover  their 


A    COVENANT   OF   LIFE.  29 

duty.  Providences  are  not  appointed  as  guides  in  life.  They  show 
God's  path  rather  than  point  out  ours.  It  is  not  His  purpose,  hidden 
in  a  decree  or  fulfilled  in  a  providence,  that  is  our  rule  of  faith  and  life, 
but  His  word.  "We  are  not  to  go  in  businesses  merely  by  providences, 
for  we  shall  find  that  oftentimes  providences  do  lay  fair  occasions  for 
sinning.  When  Jonah  was  to  go  to  Tarshish,  he  had  the  fairest  pro 
vidences  that  could  be ;  he  found  a  ship  all  ready  ;  ay,  but  he  went 
against  the  word  of  God.  Never  be  ruled  by  providences,  they  may  be 
temptations  and  probations  ;  be  ruled  by  the  word  alone  "  (Goodwin). 

3.  "  The  providence  of  God  in  the  lives  of  men  is  to  each  one  in  particular 
a  private  revelation  of  His  love  "  (Faber). 

4.  The  Scriptures  are  full  of  assurances  and  illustrations  of  the  consoling 
truth  that  grace  mingles  with  all  providences,  and  carries  them  out  to 
her  own  blessed  ends.     In  a  multitude  of  passages,  we  are  assured  that 
our  Redeemer  is  our  King  and  Protector  (John  xvii.  I,  2  ;  Rom.  viii.  28 ; 
Rev.  vii.  1-3). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  In  connection  with  the  reference  to  "Second  Causes  "  in  the  Notes,  let  the  student 
study  Aristotle's   analysis   and  classification   of   Causes,    which   will   be  found  in  his 
Works,  in  Calderwood's  Fleming,  or  in  any  Philosophical  Dictionary. 

2.  Cicero  says :  Great  things  the  gods  care  for,  small  things  they  neglect.    Con 
trast  this  with  our  Lord's  teaching  on  the  same  subject. 

3.  Let  the  devout  student  ponder  Confession,  u.  5,  and  say  if  his  own  experience 
verifies  the  truth  there  taught. 


Q.  12.  What  special  act  of  providence  did  God  exercise  toward 
man  in  the  estate  wherein  he  was  created! 

A.  When  God  had  created  man,  he  entered  into  a  covenant  of 
life  with  him,  upon  condition  of  perfect  obedience ;  forbidding 
him  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  upon 
the  pain  of  death.1 

*  Gal.  iii.  12  :  And  the  law  is  not  of  faith  :  but,  The  man  that  doeth  them  shall 
live  in  them.  Gen.  ii.  17  :  But  of  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil, 
thou  shalt  not  eat  of  it :  for  in  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely 
die. 

Immediately  after  the  definition  of  providence  given  in  the  eleventh  Answer, 
there  is  an  illustration  supplied  in  the  twelfth.  "  What  special  act  of  providence 
did  God  exercise  ?  "  and  the  Answer  before  us  is  the  reply.  See  Question  20, 
Larger  Catechism,  for  a  much  fuller  account  of  the  providence  of  God  toward 
man  in  his  creation  estate. 

a  covenant  of  life— Lat.  conventus,  from  convenire,  to  come  together,  to 


30  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM    WITH    A   COMMENTARY. 

agree.  The  n  has  been  lost  in  Eng.  covenant.  "The  word  covenant'^  not  to 
be  found  in  the  three  first  chapters  of  Genesis,  but  the  spirit  of  the  word  is 
there,  and  the  term  itself  is  expressly  predicated  of  the  transactions  there 
recorded  when  referred  to  in  other  parts  of  the  Old  Testament ;  see  Hos.  vi.  7, 
marg."  (Tayler  Lewis).  This  covenant  is  more  commonly  known  as  the 
covenant  of  works,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  coming  covenant  of  grace.  Both 
were  covenants  of  life,  in  that  life  was  the  reward  of  both.  "  And  the  Holy 
Ghost  calls  that  blessedness  of  the  old  covenant  of  works  life,  but  never 
salvation,  for  you  are  saved  by  grace  "  (Goodwin). 

The  covenant  of  life  is  here  called  a  "special  act  of  providence,"  because 
Adam  had  many  other  providential  arrangements  around  him,  and  duties 
devolving  upon  him,  besides  those  specially  embraced  in  this  covenant.  But 
amid  all  his  creative  abundance  and  comfort,  and  over  and  above  his  "  original 
righteousness,"  God  saw  good  to  lay  a  positive  law  on  Adam,  and  to  suspend 
all  his  blessedness,  and  even  life  itself,  upon  it.  That  special  act  of  pro 
vidence  was  intended  to  teach  Adam  self-restraint,  self-conquest,  and  unques 
tioning  obedience  to  the  Divine  Will.  "  The  first  covenant  under  which  Adam 
was  created  is  termed  by  di vines  fcedus  natura,  the  covenant  of  nature  ;  that 
is,  of  man's  condition,  which  from  and  by  his  creation  was  natural  to  him ; 
yet  I  would  rather  call  it  the  creation  law,  jus  creationis,  or  that  which  was 
equitable  between  God,  considered  merely  as  a  Creator  on  one  part,  and  His 
intelligent  creatures  which  were  endued  with  will  and  understanding  on  the 
other  "  (Goodwin).  See  Larger  Catechism,  Question  20.  Students  of  divinity 
will  do  well  to  consult  Professor  Tayler  Lewis's  Note  on  "  The  Bible  Idea  of 
a  Covenant,"  in  Lange's  Genesis. 

upon  condition  of  perfect  obedience— Jas.  ii.  10.  "God  will  not  be 
honoured  with  exceptions,  nor  will  He  allow  us  to  cut  off  from  His  law  what 
is  less  pleasing  to  us.  It  is  not  said  of  a  part  of  the  law,  '  This  is  the  way, 
walk  ye  in  it '  "  (Calvin). 

' '  A  man  is  spotted  though  he  have  only  one  stain  ;  a  cup  is  broken,  if  only 
the  top  be  broken ;  one  disease  will  make  a  man  sick  ;  and  there  are  a 
hundred  ways  to  wander  in,  but  only  one  to  life  and  immortality  "  (Jeremy 
Taylor).  "The  solidarity  of  the  law  is  such,  that  it  does  not  admit  of  being 
broken  in  one  point,  and  yet  kept  in  the  whole  "  (Alford). 

forbidding  him  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  knowledge— The  tree  of  the  know 
ledge  of  good  and  evil  stood  in  the  midst  of  the  garden  as  a  trial  of  obedience, 
and  as  a  sign  and  a  seal  of  the  solemn  word,  "in  the  day  thou  eatest 
thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die."  Both  the  tree  of  life  and  the  tree  of  the  know 
ledge  of  good  and  evil  received  their  names  "not  from  any  virtue  in  them" 
of  good  and  evil,  but  entirely  from  the  will  and  dispensation  of  the  Lord  God. 
They  were  set  apart  from  all  the  other  trees  not  because  of  anything  in  their 
own  nature,  but  solely  from  their  economical  and  sacramental  rank  in  Adam's 
covenant.  The  tree  of  knowledge  was  a  tree  of  trial ;  Adam's  probation  for 
good  or  evil  was  suspended  upon  it. 

"  Now  it  was  very  proper  to  make  trial  of  his  obedience  by  such  a  com 
mand  as  this,  because  the  reason  of  it  is  fetched  purely  from  the  will  of  the 
lawmaker.  Adam  had  in  his  nature  an  aversion  to  that  which  was  evil  in 
itself,  and  therefore  he  is  tried  in  a  thing  that  was  evil  only  because  it  was 
forbidden  ;  and  being  in  a  small  thing,  it  was  the  more  fit  to  prove  his 
obedience  by  "  (Matthew  Henry). 


A   COVENANT   OF   LIFE.  31 

"  The  tree  of  knowledge  grew  fast  by  : 
Knowledge  of  good  bought  dear  by  knowing  ill." — MILTON. 

"  Knowledge  is  here  taken  disparagingly,  in  a  bad  sense,  for  that  wretched 
experience  which  man  began  to  acquire  for  himself  "  (Calvin). 

upon  the  pain  of  death.     Pain  ;  Lat.  pcena,  punishment,  penalty. 

"The  wilful  sinner  has  deserved  death.  Having  used  the  gift  of  life  to 
revolt  against  Him  from  whom  he  holds  it,  it  is  just  that  this  gift  should  be 
withdrawn  from  him.  Hence  the  sentence  :  In  the  day  thou  sinnest,  thou 
shatt  die.  Every  act  of  sin  should  thus,  in  strict  justice,  be  followed  by 
death,  the  violent  and  instant  death  of  its  author  "  (Godet). 

But  death  here  is  something  far  deeper  and  more  awful  than  the  dissolution 
of  the  body.  Death  in  the  Bible  sense  is  sinfulness  ;  guilt  and  inward  corrup 
tion,  with  all  the  unspeakable  miseries  that  flow  from  it.  "  It  appears  to  me 
that  the  definition  of  this  death  is  to  be  sought  from  its  opposite  ;  we  must,  1 
say,  remember  from  what  kind  of  life  man  fell.  .  .  .  The  miseries  and  evils 
both  of  soul  and  body,  with  which  man  is  beset  so  long  as  he  is  on  earth, 
are  a  kind  of  entrance  into  death,  till  death  itself  entirely  absorbs  him.  .  .  . 
Therefore  the  question  is  superfluous,  how  it  was  that  God  threatened  death 
to  Adam  on  the  day  in  which  he  should  touch  the  fruit,  when  He  long 
delayed  the  punishment.  For  then  Adam  was  consigned  to  death,  and  death 
began  its  reign  in  him.  until  supervening  grace  should  bring  a  remedy " 
(Calvin).  (See  Dr.  David  Brown's  Romans,  p.  60,  in  present  series.) 

"  Son  of  heaven  and  earth, 
Attend ;  that  thou  art  happy,  owe  to  God  ; 
That  thou  continues!  such,  owe  to  thyself, 
That  is,  to  thy  obedience  ;  therein  stand."— MILTON. 

USES. — i.  "There  is  no  religion  without  this  idea  of  a  covenant  with  a 
personal  God,  and  therefore  all  such  views  as  those  of  Comte,  Mill,  and 
Spencer  are,  for  all  moral  and  religious  purposes,  wholly  atheistical. 
They  acknowledge  no  personality  in  God ;  they  cannot  use  the  personal 
pronouns  in  speaking  of  Him  or  to  Him.  It  may,  in  truth,  be  said  that 
all  religion  is  covenant,  even  when  religion  appears  in  its  most  perverted 
form  "  (Tayler  Lewis). 

2.  "It  is  of  great  importance  that  the  scriptural  form  of  presenting  truth 
should  be  retained.     Rationalism  was  introduced  into  the  Church  under 
the  guise  of  a  philosophical  statement  of  the  truths  of  the  Bible  free 
from  the  outward  form  in  which  the  sacred  writers,  trained  in  Judaism, 
had  presented  them.     On  this  ground  the  federal  system,  as  it  was  called, 
was  discarded.  ...  It  is  far  more   than  a  mere  matter  of  method  that 
is  involved  in  adhering  to  the  scriptural  form  of  presenting  scriptural 
truths  "  (Hodge). 

3.  "  Observe,  that  even  Adam  in  innocency  was  awed  by  a  threatening. 
Fear  is  one  of  the  handles  of  the  soul  by  which  it  is  taken  hold  of  and 
held.     If  he  then  needed  this  hedge,  much  more  do  we  need  it  now " 
(Matt.  Henry). 


32  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM    WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

Q  UESTIONS. 

1.  Derive  covenant,  and  point  out  and  explain  the  scriptural  phrases— the  Old  Cove 
nant  ;  the  New  Covenant ;  the  Everlasting  Covenant ;  the  Books  of  the  Covenant ; 
the  Ark  of  the  Covenant ;  the  Blood  of  the  Covenant ;  the  Tables  of  the  Covenant. 

2.  Derive  and  explain  the  newly-adopted  word  solidarity. 

3    What  would  form  answers  from  Scripture  and  experience  to  Satan's  sneer: — 

"  Knowledge  forbidden  ? 

Suspicion,  reasonless.     Why  should  their  Lord 
Envy  them  that  ?    Can  it  be  sin  to  know, 
Can  it  be  death  ?    And  do  they  only  stand 


By  ignorance,  is  that  their  happy  state, 
The  proof  of  their  obedience  and  their  faith  ? 


Q.  13.  Did  our  first  parents  continue  in  the  estate  wherein  they 
were  created? 

A.  Our  first  parents,  being  left  to  the  freedom  of  their  own 
will,  fell  from  the  estate  wherein  they  were  created,  by  sinning 
against  God.y 

y  Gen.  iii.  6 :  And  when  the  woman  saw  that  the  tree  was  good  for  food,  and 
that  it  was  pleasant  to  the  eyes,  and  a  tree  to  be  desired  to  make  one  wise,  she 
took  of  the  fruit  thereof,  and  did  eat ;  and  gave  also  unto  her  husband  with  her, 
and  he  did  eat.  Ver.  8  :  And  Adam  and  his  wife  hid  themselves  from  the 
presence  of  the  Lord  God  amongst  the  trees  of  the  garden.  Eccles.  vii.  29  :  Lo, 
this  only  have  I  found,  that  God  hath  made  man  upright ;  but  they  have  sought 
out  many  inventions. 

being  left  to  the  freedom  of  their  own  will — It  is  a  very  mysterious 
thing  that  God  should  so  "innovate  upon  His  own  eternity"  as  to  summon 
into  existence  a  race  of  creatures,  and  bestow  upon  them  the  perilous  gift  of 
free-will — a  perilous  and  in  the  event  a  fatal  gift :  because,  as  experience 
proved,  the  possessor  of  it  might  rise  up  against  his  Maker,  might  oppose  and 
obstruct  His  will,  and  introduce  sin  and  misery  and  death  where  life  and  love 
and  holiness  had  been  intended  to  dwell. 

"Freedom  of  will  is  a  power  in  the  will,  whereby  it  doth  of  its  own 
accord,  without  force  upon  it,  choose  or  refuse  what  is  proposed  to  it  by  the 
understanding.  And  man  hath  this  freedom  of  will  in  whatever  state  he  be. 
In  the  state  of  innocency  it  extendeth  to  good  or  evil ;  in  the  state  of  corrupt 
nature,  to  evil  only  ;  in  the  state  of  grace,  partly  to  good  and  partly  to  evil  ; 
and  in  the  state  of  glory,  only  to  good  "  (Boston.  See  this  author's  famous 
fourfold  State). 

11  The  practice  of  distinguishing,  in  the  exposition  of  this  subject,  between 
the  freedom  of  man's  will  in  his  unfallen  and  in  his  fallen  condition,  and 
indeed  of  viewing  it  distinctively  with  reference  to  the  different  stages  or 
periods  of  his  fourfold  state, — as  unfallen,  fallen,  regenerate,  or  glorified, — 
has  prevailed  in  the  Church  in  almost  all  ages.  These  views  were  fully 
brought  out  and  applied  by  Augustine.  .  .  .  They  were  embraced  and  pro- 


THE    FALL.  33 

mulgated  by  the  whole  body  of  Reformers,  both  Lutheran  and  Calvinistic.  .  .  . 
They  have  a  prominent  place  in  the  Westminster  Confession,  the  Qth  chapter, 
entitled  '  Of  Free  Will,'  being  entirely  devoted  to  the  statement  of  them  " 
(Cunningham's  Essay  (ix. ),  Calvinism,  and  the  Doctrine  of  Philosophical 
Necessity}.  Let  this  essay  be  mastered  by  all  who  would  understand  this 
subject. 

"  God  made  thee  perfect,  not  immutable  ; 

And  good  He  made  thee  ;  but  to  persevere 

He  left  it  in  thy  power  :  ordained  thy  will 

By  nature  free." — MILTON. 

fell — THE  FALL  is  a  technical  theological  term,  appropriated  to  that  cata 
strophe  which  is  described  at  length  in  the  third  chapter  of  Genesis,  and 
assumed  throughout  Scripture.  The  expression  in  this  historical  and  original 
sense  is  not  found  in  Scripture ;  its  earliest  use  is  in  Wisd.  x.  I.  But  see 
Cruden's  analysis  under  the  word;  also  John  viii.  44,  R.  V.,  "Satan 
stood  not." 

fell  ...  by  sinning  against  God.  "Judas  by  transgression  fell'"  (Acts 
i.  25).  "  The  words  crime  and  criminal  belong  to  every  language  ;  but  sin 
and  sinner  belong  exclusively  to  the  vocabulary  of  the  Christian  revelation  " 
(de  Maistre). 

"  The  word  sin,  just  because  it  denotes  the  God  ward  side  of  moral  evil, 
branding  it  as  a  transgression  of  moral  law,  is  excluded  from  the  vocabulary 
of  certain  philosophical  schools,  and  is  seldom  heard  from  the  lips  of  worldly 
men  "  (Binnie). 

USES. — I.  "Many  there  be  that  complain  of  Divine  Providence  for  suffering 
Adam  to  transgress.  Foolish  tongues  !  When  God  gave  him  reason,  He 
gave  him  freedom  to  choose  ;  for  reason  is  but  choosing :  he  had  been 
else  a  meer  artificiall  Adam,  such  an  Adam  as  he  is  in  the  motions  " 
(Areopagiticd). 

2.  "The  sovereign  will  must  be  granted  a  right  of  freedom — that  freedom 
which  by  putting  it  into  our  wills  He  surely  teaches  us  to  honour  in  His  " 
(Drummond's  Natural  Law). 

3.  "The  Bible  account  of  the  fall  and  sin,   instead  of  vilifying  human 
nature,  implies  the  highest  view  of  man  and  his  constitution.  ...  It 
is  mere  perversion  of  thought  and  language,  however,  to  represent  man's 
experience  of  moral  evil  as  not  a  fall  but  a  rise  "  (Laidlaw). 

4.  Butler  shows  that    the   supposition  of  the  fall  is   the  ground  of  the 
Christian  dispensation. 

5.  Edward  Irving  goes  further  :   "The  very  end  of  the  fall  was  to  put  the 
proper  distance  between  the  Creator  and  the  creatures  :  and  to  show  the 
creature  that  the  source  and  the  continuance  of  its  being  was  from  God, 
and  not  in  any  way  from  itself.     And  if  any  one  ask  me,  Could  not  this, 
without  a  fall,  have  been  accomplished  ?  I  am  ready  to  answer,   As  to 
that  I  cannot  tell ;  but  I  believe  that  this  was  the  best  way  of  accom 
plishing  it." 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Derive  and  explain  estate  as  it  is  used  in  Answers   13,  18,  and  20 ;  and  point 
out  where  in  the  Catechism  we  find  those  various  estates  most  fully  drawn  out  and 
described, 

2.  What  is  meant  by  saying  that  a  word  is  technical,  and  that  it  is  theological  and 
not  scriptural? 

3.  Cunningham  says,  Hist.  Thool.  /.  575,  that  Caluin  repeatedly  quotes  with  appro- 

C 


34  THE   SHORTER    CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

bation  the  striking  and  pithy  saying  of  Augustine,  that  man,  by  making  a  bad  use 
of  his  free-will,  lost  both  himself  and  it.    Explain. 

4.  Explain  also  the  saying  of  Klee,  a  German  divine:  The  fall  of  man  was  a  two 
fold  process ;  first  he  fell  out  of  God  into  himself,  and  then  he  fell  out  of  himself 
inio  nature  (see  Luke  xv.  17). 

5.  What  do  Bull  and  Goodwin  mean  by  the  phrases :  the  lubricity  of  the  will ;  the 
vertibility  and  slipperiness  of  free-will? 


Q.  14.    What  is  sin1} 

A.  Sin  is  any  want  of  conformity  unto,  or  transgression  of,  the 
law  of  God.2 

z  i  John  iii.  4 :  Whosoever  committeth  sin  transgresseth  also  the  law  :  for  sin  is 
the  transgression  of  the  law. 

Sin— Wickedness,  iniquity,  crime.  Skeat  follows  Curtius  in  tracing  the 
root  to  a  Teutonic  base,  A.S.  to  be.  "  Language  regards  the  guilty  man  as 
the  man  who  it  was."  Cf.  Gen.  iii.  12,  13  ;  2  Sam.  xii.  7;  Rom.  vii.  9. 
"Sin  consists  essentially  in  the  motives,  dispositions,  and  volitions  of  the 
heart  ;  and  the  external  act  only  possesses  a  moral  nature  by  its  connection 
with  these  internal  affections"  (Princeton  Essays,  xi. ). 

want  of  conformity — Whoso  committeth  sin  transgresseth  also  the  law  ; 
for  sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  law,  and  where  no  law  is  there  is  no 
transgression.  The  law  of  God  is  the  rule  given  to  man  for  all  his  actions, 
and  wherein  he  does  not  conform  his  actions  to  that  rule  he  has  committed 
sin.  We  may  commit  sin  either  by  doing  what  we  ought  not  to  do,  or  by 
not  doing  what  it  is  our  duty  to  do.  We  may  become  guilty  either  by  com 
mission  or  omission.  Want  of  conformity  here  means  sins  of  omission,  and 
transgression  means  the  commission  of  actual  deeds  of  sin.  This  two-edged 
definition  is  admirably  observed  and  illustrated  in  the  analysis  of  the  Ten 
Commandments  given  in  the  practical  parts  of  the  Catechism.  Under  each 
commandment  it  is  asked,  What  is  required  ?  and,  What  is  forbidden  ? 
In  other  words,  What  is  "conformity  "  here?  and  what  is  "transgression"  ? 
See  Paterson's  Preface. 

Augustine  defines  sin  as  factum  vel  dictum  vel  concupitum  aliquid  contra 
ceternarn  legem,  every  work,  word,  or  wish  contrary  to  the  law  of  God.  And 
Trench  in  his  New  Testament  Synonyms  gathers  a  "mournfully  numerous  " 
group  of  words  out  of  Holy  Scripture,  all  of  which  describe  sin  in  one  or 
other  of  its  many  aspects,  it  is  the  missing  of  a  mark  or  aim  ;  it  is  the  over 
passing  or  transgression  of  a  line ;  it  is  disobedience  to  a  voice  ;  it  is  falling 
where  one  should  have  stood  upright ;  it  is  ignorance  of  what  one  ought  to 
have  known  ;  it  is  any  diminishing  of  that  which  should  have  been  rendered 
in  full  measure  ;  it  is  non-observance  of  a  law ;  it  is  a  discord,  and  other  evil 
things  and  ways  "almost  out  of  number." 

"  Sin  is  no  other  thing  than  disagreeableness,  in  a  moral  agent,  to  the  law, 
or  rule  of  his  duty.  And  therefore  the  degree  of  sin  is  to  be  judged  by  the 
rule ;  so  much  disagreeableness  to  the  rule,  so  much  sin,  whether  it  be  in 
deject  or  excess.  .  .  .  Sin  is  an  abominable  defect,  and  appears  so  to  the 
saints,  especially  those  that  are  eminent "  (Edwards). 

USES. — i.    "  Shall  I  speak  the  least  evil  I  can  say  of  sin?     It  is  an  evil, 
which  in  the  nature  and  essence  of  it,  virtually  and  eminently  contains 


SIN.  35 

all  evils  of  all  kinds  that  are  in  the  world,  insomuch  as  in  the  Scriptures 
you  shall  find  that  all  the  evils  of  the  world  serve  but  to  answer  for  it, 
and  to  give  names  to  it.  Hence  sin,  it  is  called  poison,  and  sinners, 
serpents  ;  sin  is  called  a  vomit,  and  sinners,  dogs  ;  it  is  the  stench  of 
graves,  and  they  rotten  sepulchres ;  it  is  mire,  sinners,  sows ;  and  sin, 
darkness,  blindness,  shame,  nakedness,  folly,  madness,  death,  whatever 
is  filthy,  defective,  infective,  painful.  ...  It  is  so  evil  that  it  cannot 
have  a  worse  epithet  given  to  it  than  itself ;  and  therefore  the  apostle, 
when  he  would  speak  his  worst  of  it,  and  wind  up  his  expression  highest, 
usque  ad  hyperbolcm,  calls  it  by  its  own  name,  sinful  sin  (Rom.  vii.  13). 
...  It  is  sinning  sin,  you  cannot  call  it  by  a  worse  name  than  its  own  " 
(Goodwin). 

2.  "  Sin  is  the  living  worm,  the  lasting  fire  ; 

Hell  soon  would  lose  its  heat,  could  sin  expire, 
Better  sinless  is  hell,  than  to  be  where 
Heaven  is,  and  to  be  found  a  sinner  there. 
One  sinless  with  infernals  might  do  well, 
But  sin  would  make  of  heaven  a  very  hell. 

Look  to  thyself  then,  keep  it  out  of  door, 

Lest  it  get  in  and  never  leave  thee  more. 

"  Fools  make  a  mock  at  sin,  will  not  believe 
It  carries  such  a  dagger  in  its  sleeve  ; 
How  can  it  be,  say  they,  that  such  a  thing, 
So  full  of  sweetness,  e'er  should  wear  a  sting? 
They  know  not  that  it  is  the  very  spell 
Of  sin,  to  make  them  laugh  themselves  to  hell. 

Look  to  thyself,  then,  deal  with  sin  no  more, 

Lest  He  who  saves,  against  thee  shuts  the  door."— BUNYAN. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Hodge  points  out  that  the  sinfulness  of  any  "want  of  conformity"  lies  ultimately 
in  want  of  congeniality.    Explain. 

2.  The  Catechism  at  its  strongest  is  much  less  severe  in  its  language  concerning 
sin  than  the  Scriptures.    Give  some  illustrations   of  the  awful  language  used  in  the 
word  of  God  about  sin.    And  study  the  terrific  account  of  the  procreation  of  sin  by 
Satan,  its  father,  in  Paradise  Lost. 

3.  Divinity  students,  and  all  who  would  hnow  more  of  this  subject,  should  see  Dr. 
Hodge's  analysis   of   Augustine's    doctrine    of  sin    in    his    second  volume.      Also  the 
"mournfully  numerous"  group  of  scriptural  synonyms  for  sin  in  Trench.     Under  Sin 
let  students  consult  the  index  to  Dr.  Thomas  Goodwin's  Works,  the  most  scriptural  and 
by  far  the  most  suggestive  of  all  the  Puritan  divines. 

4.  Illustrate  the  criminality  of  sins  of  omission  from  our  Lord's  parables. 


Q.  15.  What  was  the  sin  whereby  our  first  parents  fell  from  the 
estate  wherein  they  were  created  ? 

A.  The  sin  whereby  our  first  parents  fell  from  the  estate 
wherein  they  were  created,  was  their  eating  the  forbidden  fruit.* 

a  Gen.  iii.  6.  [See  in  letter  y.J  Ver.  12  :  The  woman  whom  thou  gavest  to  be 
with  me,  she  gave  me  of  the  tree,  and  I  did  eat. 

the  forbidden  fruit.  "  There  was  no  evil  in  the  fruit  itself.  The  evil  of 
the  matter  lay  in  man's  eating  it  against  the  express  command  of  God.  God 


36  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

forbade  it  to  be  eaten,  for  the  trial  of  man's  obedience.  And  the  fitness  of 
taking  trial  of  man  by  that  means,  appears  in  that  so  it  was  taken  in  an 
external  thing,  in  itself  indifferent,  wherein  man's  obedience  behoved  to  turn 
precisely  upon  the  point  of  the  will  of  God  "  (Boston). 

"  Not  that  I  tasted  of  the  tree,  my  son, 
Was  in  itself  the  cause  of  that  exile, 
But  only  my  transgressing  of  the  mark 
Assigned  me." — ADAM  TO  DANTE. 

"  The  opinion  of  some  of  the  ancients,  that  our  first  parents  were  allured 
by  intemperance  of  appetite,  is  puerile.  Augustine  is  more  correct,  who  says 
that  pride  was  the  beginning  of  all  evils,  and  that  by  pride  the  human  race 
was  ruined.  .  .  .  Unbelief  was  the  root  of  defection,  just  as  faith  alone  unites 
us  to  God  "  (Calvin). 


Q.  1 6.  Did  all  mankind  fall  in  Adam's  first  transgression  ? 

A.  The  covenant  being  made  with  Adam,  not  only  for  him 
self,  but  for  his  posterity ;  all  mankind,  descending  from  him  by 
ordinary  generation,  sinned  in  him,  and  fell  with  him,  in  his  first 
transgression.1* 


b  Rom.  v.  12  :  Wherefore,  as  by  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world,  and  death 
by  sin  ;  and  so  death  passed  upon  all  men,  for  that  all  have  sinned,  i  Cor.  xv.  21 : 
For  since  by  man  came  death,  by  man  came  also  the  resurrection  of  the  dead. 
Ver.  22  :  For  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive. 

The  covenant— See  Answer  12. 

Adam — A  Hebrew  word  signifying  red,  ground  colour.  But  the  generic 
term  Adam  becomes  in  the  case  of  the  first  man  a  denominative.  The 
name  may  possibly  have  been  given  to  embody  the  history  of  his  creation. 
Some  scholars  hold,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  name  comes  from  a  similar 
Hebrew  root,  meaning  likeness ;  and  that  the  allusion  consequently  is  to  the 
divine  fiat :  "  Let  us  make  man  after  our  likeness." 

not  only  for  himself,  but  for  his  posterity — "With Adam  as  a  pub- 
lick  person  "  (Larger  Catechism).  Read  Rom.  v.  12-19.  "God  made  and 
appointed  Adam  to  be  a  public  person,  yet  not  so  out  of  mere  will,  but  that 
it  had  also  for  its  foundation  so  natural  and  necessary  a  ground,  as  it  was 
rather  a  natural  than  a  voluntary  thing.  .  .  .  Now  the  natural  necessity  upon 
which  this  designation  of  him  to  be  a  public  person  was  made  is  this  :  God 
had,  as  the  author  of  nature,  made  this  law  of  nature,  that  man  should  beget 
in  his  image  or  likeness.  ...  So  then,  in  this  first  man  the  whole  nature 
of  man  being  reposited,  therefore  what  befalls  this  nature  in  him  by  any 
action  of  his,  that  nature  is  to  be  propagated  from  him  "  (Goodwin). 

by  ordinary  generation — This  exception  is  taken  because  of  the  extra 
ordinary  generation  of  our  Lord  in  His  incarnation.  His  birth  was  so  ordered 
by  God  that  He  was  the  Son  of  man,  one  of  the  human  race,  and  yet  that  the 
entail  of  original  sin  did  not  embrace  Him.  God,  in  ways  we  cannot  fathom, 
but  at  the  same  time  in  ways  that  show  us  that  a  singular  exception  was  here 


ADAM'S  FIRST  TRANSGRESSION.  37 

made  to  the  otherwise  universal  traduction  of  original  sin,  sent  His  Eternal 
Son  in  our  nature,  and  yet  did  not  send  Him  through  Adam.  The  birth  of 
Christ  was  rather  a  creation  of  a  new  humanity  than  a  propagation  and 
sanctification  of  the  old.  His  flesh  was  the  flesh  of  Adam's  race,  sanctified 
and  united  to  the  personality  of  the  Son  of  God.  Adam  was  the  type  of 
Christ,  but  he  was  not  His  father. 

"  The  man  Christ  was  not  included  in  that  representation  which  Adam 
made  as  head  of  the  covenant  of  works  (i  Cor.  xv.  22,  45) ;  and  that,  because 
Christ  came  not  in  virtue  of  the  blessing  -of  fruitfulness,  given  while  the 
covenant  of  works  stood  entire,  but  in  virtue  of  a  special  promise  made  after 
it  was  broken  (Gen.  i.  28,  iii.  15).  Adam's  sin,  then,  could  not  be  imputed 
to  the  man  Christ,  since  Adam  did  not  represent  Him  in  the  covenant " 
(Boston). 

"The  formation  of  His  human  nature  was  the  effect  of  miraculous,  super 
natural  creating  power ;  therefore  he  was  no  more  liable  to  Adam's  sin, 
as  being  man,  than  a  world  of  men  would  be,  should  God  create  them  out  of 
the  dust  of  the  ground,  which  would  be  no  more  miraculous  or  supernatural 
than  it  was  to  form  the  human  nature  of  Christ  in  the  womb  of  the  Virgin. 
Now,  as  Jesus,  so  formed,  would  not  be  concerned  in  Adam's  sin,  or  fall, 
whatever  similitude  there  might  be  of  nature ;  even  so  our  Saviour  was  not 
concerned  therein  "  (Ridgley). 

all  mankind  .  .  .  sinned  in  him — That  is  to  say,  we  were  so  in  Adam  that 
what  he  did  we  did,  not  indeed  as  to  the  act,  but  as  to  its  consequences. 
Human  life  is  full  of  this  vicarious,  solidary  way  of  acting  and  suffering,  and 
this  was  the  first  and  most  terrible  example  of  it.  "To  be  guilty  of  Adam's 
sin,  meant  in  the  Latin  anthropology,  to  be  guilty  of  the  Adamic  sin.  It 
implied  the  oneness  of  Adam  and  his  posterity,  and  a  guilt  that  belonged  to 
the  sum  total,  only  because  the  sin  was  the  act  of  the  sum  total "  (Shedd). 
There  are  three  very  powerful  and  exhaustive  articles  on  Imputation  in  the 
first  series  of  the  Princeton  Essays.  But  see  any  high-class  Calvinistic  or 
Puritan  theologian  on  Adam  in  relation  to  the  human  race.  See  under 
Imputation  in  any  sound  system  of  theology.  Consult  under  Question  33. 

fell  with  him — "  Fell  with  him  in  that  first  transgression  "  (Larger  Cate 
chism).  "  O  thou  Adam,  what  hast  thou  done?  For  though  it  was  thou 
that  sinned,  thou  art  not  fallen  alone,  but  we  all  that  come  of  thee  "  (2  Esdr. 
vii.  48;  Rom.  v.). 

"  Both  death  and  I 

Are  found  eternal,  and  incorporate  both  ; 
Nor  I  on  my  part  single,  in  me  all 
Posterity  stands  curst.     Fair  patrimony 
That  I  must  leave  ye,  sons  !"— MILTON. 

"  It  is  improper  to  say,  Adam's  eating  of  the  forbidden  fruit  was  personally 
and  inherently  an  act  of  mine.  It  was  personally  his,  and  imputatively  mine  : 
personally  his,  because  he  did  it ;  imputatively  mine,  because  I  was  then  in 
him.  Indeed,  the  effects  of  his  personal  eating  is  found  in  my  person ;  to 
wit,  defilement  and  pravity  "  (Bunyan). 

in  his  first  transgression.  Those  divines  who  go  most  deeply  into  these 
matters,  believe  that  they  have  sufficient  scriptural  and  theological  ground  for 
holding  that  Adam's  headship  ceased  with  his  fall.  See  Rom.  v.  18,  Revised 
Version, 


38  THE    SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

USE. — "  Our  very  nature  is  sinful.  Herein  is  the  importance  of  the  doctrine 
of  original  sin.  It  is  very  humbling,  and  as  such  the  only  true  introduc 
tion  to  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  Men  do  not  like  to  be  told  that  the 
race  from  which  they  spring  is  degenerate.  We  know  how  ashamed 
men  are  of  being  low  born  or  discreditably  connected.  This  is  the  sort 
of  shame  forced  upon  every  son  of  Adam.  '  Thy  first  father  hath  sinned  ' 
is  the  legend  on  our  forehead  "  (Newman). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Explain  and  illustrate  the  phrases  common  person  and  public  person. 

2.  Draw  out  and    establish  Dr.   Cunningham's    position,   that  the  doctrine  of  the 
Catechism  here  alone  explains  and  accounts  for  "phenomena  which  actually  exist. 


Q.  17.  Into  what  estate  did  the  fall  bring  mankind? 

A.  The  fall  brought  mankind  into  an  estate  of  sin  and  misery.0 

0  Rom.  v.  12 :  Wherefore,  as  by  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world,  and  death 
by  sin  ;  and  so  death  passed  upon  all  men,  for  that  all  have  sinned. 

sin  and  misery.  Sin  is  both  guilt  and  disease.  Man's  depravity,  there 
fore,  is  the  object  both  of  vengeance  and  compassion,  as  the  Catechism 
proceeds  to  set  forth. 


Q.  1 8.  Wherein  consists  the  sinfulness  of  that  estate  whereinto 
man  f ell 'i 

A.  The  sinfulness  of  that  estate  whereinto  man  fell,  consists  in 
the  guilt  of  Adam's  first  sin,  the  want  of  original  righteousness, 
and  the  corruption  of  his  whole  nature,  which  is  commonly 
called  Original  Sin ;  together  with  all  actual  transgressions  which 
proceed  from  it.d 

d  Rom.  v.  12  :  Wherefore,  as  by  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world,  and  death 
by  sin  ;  and  so  death  passed  upon  all  men,  for  that  all  have  sinned.  Ver.  19 :  By 
one  man's  disobedience  many  were  made  sinners.  Rom.  v.  from  verse  10  to  20. 
Eph.  ii.  i  :  Dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  Ver.  2 :  Wherein  in  time  past  ye  walked 
according  to  the  course  of  this  world  .  .  .  children  of  disobedience.  Ver.  3  :  .  .  . 
by  nature  the  children  of  wrath,  even  as  others.  Jas.  i.  14 :  But  every  man  is 
tempted,  when  he  is  drawn  away  of  his  own  lust,  and  enticed.  Ver.  15  :  Then, 
when  lust  hath  conceived,  it  bringeth  forth  sin  ;  and  sin,  when  it  is  finished, 
bringeth  forth  death.  Matt.  xv.  19 :  For  out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts, 
murders,  adulteries,  fornications,  thefts,  false  witness,  blasphemies. 

This  Question  deals  with  some  of  the  most  profound  and  important  matters 
in  the  whole  range  of  revealed  and  experimental  religion.  And  the  Answer 
supplies  a  clear,  careful,  and  every  way  admirable  statement  of  Pauline, 
Augustinian,  and  Calvinistic  doctrine.  In  language  the  most  scriptural  and 


39 

theologically  exact,  the  guilt  and  corruption  of  Adam,  and  through  him  of  all 
mankind,  are  here  set  forth.  And  the  foundations  are  here  laid  deep  for  that 
noble  structure  of  gospel  truth  that  is  soon  to  rise  before  us.  The  most 
that  can  be  done  in  the  notes  to  such  a  condensed  mass  of  doctrine  as  this 
Answer  contains,  is  to  call  the  student's  attention  to  the  main  outlines  of  the 
several  doctrines  here  set  forth,  and  especially  to  indicate  where  the  best 
teaching  is  to  be  found  on  the  profound  but  most  personal  and  urgent  truths 
here  enunciated. 

the  guilt  of  Adam's  first  sin — "  Guilt.  Properly  conduct  which  has  to  be 
atoned  for,  which  has  to  be  paid  for.  Debt,  return  of  equivalent "  (Wedg 
wood).  "  Crime,  punishable  offence.  The  original  sense  was  probably  a  fine 
or  a  payment  by  way  of  recompense  for  a  trespass ;  and  the  word  is  to 
be  connected  with  A.  S.  gyld,  a  recompense.  Both  words  are  from  the 
Teutonic  base  gald>  to  pay  "  (Skeat).  But  words  become  shaped  and  fitted 
to  things  ;  and  as  human  life  becomes  enlarged  and  enriched,  or  again  de 
graded  and  impoverished,  so  human  language  expands  or  contracts  itself  to 
life  and  experience.  And  accordingly,  while  guilt  in  the  text  retains  all  its 
etymological  significance,  yet  here  the  further  element  is  necessarily  added 
of  representation,  suretyship,  and  solidarity.  If  there  is  anything  fixed 
in  theological  language,  it  is  the  sense  of  the  word  guilt.  And  if  there  is 
anything  in  which  Calvinists  are  agreed,  it  is  in  saying  that  when  they  affirm 
"that  the  guilt  of  Adam's  sin  has  come  upon  us,"  they  mean  exposure  to 
punishment  on  account  of  that  sin.  The  first  and  commonest  meaning  of 
this  word  undoubtedly  is  that  liability  to  punishment  that  follows  a  personal 
act  of  illegality.  But  all  history,  and  literature,  and  experience  sustain  the 
Calvinistic  use  of  the  word.  We  all  suffer  daily  through  the  wrong-doing  of 
others.  And  often  the  guilt  of  others,  of  those  over  us,  and  in  a  place  to  act 
for  us — statesmen,  parents,  representatives — is  imputed  to  us  in  exactly  the 
Pauline  and  catechetical  sense.  Turretine  says  that  the  union  or  relationship 
which  is  to  serve  as  the  ground  of  imputation  may  be  threefold — natural, 
as  between  the  father  and  his  children ;  moral  and  political,  as  between  the 
king  and  his  subjects  ;  voluntary,  as  among  friends,  and  between  the  guilty 
and  his  substitute.  The  bond  between  Adam  and  his  posterity  is  twofold — 
natural,  as  he  is  a  father  and  we  are  his  children  ;  and  political  and  forensic, 
as  he  was  the  prince  and  representative  head  of  the  whole  human  race.  And 
Owen,  in  his  great  work  On  Justification,  says  that  things  that  are  not  our 
own  may  yet  be  imputed  to  us,  and  that  by  a  rule  of  perfect  righteousness. 
Things  done  by  one  may  be  imputed  to  an  other  propter  relationem  fcederalem, 
because  of  a  covenant  relation  between  them.  So  the  sin  of  Adam  was  and 
is  imputed  to  all  his  posterity.  And  the  ground  of  this  is,  that  we  stood  in 
the  same  covenant  with  him,  naturally  and  morally,  who  was  our  head  and 
representative.  For  most  clear,  sober,  and  convincing  discussions  of  this 
subject,  let  the  easily  accessible  writings  of  Dr.  Cunningham  and  Dr.  Hodge 
be  consulted.  See  Macpherson's  Confession,  chap.  vi. 

the  want  of  original  righteousness — The  Catechism,  following  Scripture, 
here  teaches  that  mankind  have  now  lost  that  "righteousness"  which  as  a 
race  we  were  created  with.  We  are  not  only  a  disinherited  family,  but  we 
are  personally  depraved  and  demoralized.  We  are  born  in  sin  ;  we  are  born 
sinners.  The  image  of  God  is  all  but  obliterated  in  us ;  it  is  altogether 
obliterated  in  its  best  features.  Consult  Answer  10  as  to  what  we  had  and 
what  we  have  lost. 


40  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH    A   COMMENTARY. 

the  corruption  of  his  whole  nature — "Corruption.  The  state  of  being 
corrupt  or  putrid  ;  the  process  of  putrefaction  ;  putrescence  ;  taint.  Loss  of 
purity  and  integrity  ;  depravity,  wickedness  "  (Webster).  The  word  is  used 
in  morals  and  religion  in  a  metaphorical  sense,  and  means  moral  putrescence 
and  pollution.  "  If  a  man  is  able  to  do  a  right  action,  and  does  a  wrong 
one,  he  is  personally  guilty  indeed,  but  it  cannot  be  said  that  his  nature  is 
corrupt.  The  passions  and  affections  may  be  inconveniently  strong,  and  so 
the  nature  be  at  a  disadvantage  ;  but  no  mere  strength  of  the  passions  and 
affections  shows  the  nature  corrupt  so  long  as  the  will  retains  its  power.  .  .  . 
The  test  of  a  sound  or  corrupt  nature,  then,  is  an  able  or  an  impotent  will ; 
and  if  a  corruption  of  nature  means  anything  at  all,  it  means  the  loss  of  free 
will.  This  was  the  legitimate  advance  that  was  wanted  in  the  Western 
Church  to  complete  the  expression  of  the  doctrine ;  and  this  complement  it 
was  left  to  St.  Augustine  to  give"  (Mozley).  "The  corruption  of  human 
nature  might  be  a  doctrine  of  theology,  but  it  was  also  a  fact  in  natural 
history.  If  a  naturalist  could  come  from  Jupiter  or  Saturn  to  describe 
the  inhabitants  of  this  earth,  he  would  say  that  man  alone  had  instincts 
and  tendencies  which  were  constantly  leading  him  to  courses  of  action 
injurious  and  fatal  to  himself  and  to  the  race  to  which  he  belonged.  This 
corruption  was  a  fact  in  natural  history  "  (Duke  of  Argyll  in  the  House  of 
Lords,  June  28,  1883).  "Nor  is  it  any  proof  to  the  contrary  that  men 
often  excel  in  generosity  of  disposition,  undertake  designs  apparently 
honourable,  and  put  forth  evidences  of  virtue.  .  .  .  For  all  such  things  which 
please  us  with  the  colour  of  virtue,  are  like  wine  spoiled  with  the  flavour 
of  the  cask"  (Calvin).  Commenting  on  Zech.  xiv.  12,  Dr.  Moore  says: 
"  The  first  element  of  the  punishment  is  corruption,  which  is  set  forth  by  the 
terrible  image  of  a  living  death,  a  fearful,  anomalous  state,  in  which  the 
mouldy  rottenness  of  death  is  combined  in  horrible  union  with  the  vivid, 
conscious  sensibility  of  life.  The  soul  of  the  sinner,  in  its  future  conscious 
ness  of  sin,  shall  feel  its  loathsome  corruption  as  vividly  as  now  it  would  feel 
the  slow  putrefaction  of  the  body  that  rotted  piecemeal  to  the  grave." 

Accounting  for  the  origin  of  this  corruption  of  human  nature,  and  defending 
his  doctrines  from  all  misunderstanding  and  misrepresentation,  Edwards  says  : 
"I  think  a  little  attention  to  the  nature  of  things  will  be  sufficient  to  satisfy 
any  impartial  considerate  inquirer  that  the  absence  of  positive  good  principles, 
leaving  the  natural  principles  of  self-love,  appetite,  etc.,  to  themselves,  will 
certainly  be  followed  with  the  corruption,  yea,  the  total  corruption  of  the 
heart."  For  the  full  proof  and  illustration  of  this  position  see  the  whole  of 
the  sober  and  masterly  chapter,  Original  Sin,  Part  iv.  chap.  ii. 

whole  nature — "  There  is  an  intense  aversion  to  the  doctrine  of  total 
depravity  in  some  men's  minds.  .  .  .  The  feeling  comes  in  some  measure 
from  a  misapprehension  of  its  true  meaning.  It  is  a  term  of  extensity  rather 
than  intensity.  It  is  opposed  to  partial  depravity ;  to  the  idea  that  man 
is  sinful  in  one  moment  and  innocent  or  sinless  in  another ;  or  sinful  in  some 
acts  and  pure  in  others.  It  affirms  that  he  is  all  wrong,  in  all  things,  and  all 
the  time.  It  does  not  mean  that  man  is  as  bad  as  the  devil,  or  that  every 
man  is  as  bad  as  every  other,  or  that  any  man  is  as  bad  as  he  may  possibly 
be,  or  may  become.  But  there  is  no  limit  to  the  universality  or  extent  of 
evil  in  his  soul.  So  say  the  Scriptures,  and  so  says  every  awakened  con 
science  "  (Tayler  Lewis).  See  the  whole  of  the  admirable  note  in  Lange's 
Genesis. 


ORIGINAL   SIN.  41 

"  Man  lay  a  grovelling  babe  upon  the  ground) 

Polluted  in  the  blood  of  his  first  sire, 
With  all  his  essence  shattered  and  unsound, 

And  coiled  around  his  heart  a  demon  dire, 
Which  was  not  of  his  nature,  but  had  skill 
To  bind  and  form  his  opening  mind  to  ill. 

w  O  man,  strange  composite  of  heaven  and  earth  ! 

Majesty  dwarfed  to  baseness  !  fragrant  flower 

Running  to  poisonous  seed  !  and  seeming  worth 

Choking  corruption  !  weakness  mastering  power  I 
Who  never  art  so  near  to  crime  and  shame, 
A  when  thou  hast  achieved  some  deed  of  name." 

— Dream  ofGerontius. 

(See  Bunyan's  Divine  Emblems,  No.  xvii.,  "The  Sinner  and  the  Spider ;" 
also  his  Grace  Abounding,  Par.  84.) 

commonly  called  Original  Sin — This  theological  distinction  and  nomen 
clature  is  derived  from  Augustine,  to  whom  the  Church  of  Christ  owes  so 
much.  Now  what  is  original  sin  ?  The  Shorter  Catechism  answers  that  it  is 
the  inherited  corruption  of  the  whole  moral  and  spiritual  nature  of  man.  And 
the  Larger  Catechism  enlarges  that  Answer  thus :  "Original  sin  is  the  corrup 
tion  of  man's  nature,  whereby  he  is  utterly  indisposed,  disabled,  and  made 
opposite  to  all  that  is  spiritually  good,  and  wholly  inclined  to  evil,  and  that 
continually."  A  fearful  indictment  to  be  laid  against  all  mankind  without 
exception ;  but  by  the  confession  of  the  ablest  and  best  of  mankind,  not  one 
whit  exaggerated,  or  in  any  point  opposed  to  actual  fact  and  daily  experience. 
If  any  reader  doubts  the  truth  of  this  terrible  doctrine,  or  is  staggered  at  the 
tremendous  charge  it  lays  against  human  nature,  he  is  recommended  to 
suspend  his  judgment  till  he  has  read  the  great  masterpiece  on  this  subject, 
Jonathan  Edwards'  Original  Sin.  Dr.  Cunningham  admits  that  it  may  be 
doubted,  as  a  mere  question  of  grammatical  construction,  whether  the  words, 
"which  is  commonly  called  Original  Sin,"  apply  only  to  the  "  corruption  of 
his  whole  nature,"  which  is  the  immediate  antecedent,  or  include  also  the 
other  ingredients  or  constituent  elements  of  the  sinfulness  of  the  state  into  which 
man  fell,  which  had  been  previously  mentioned, — viz.  the  guilt  of  Adam's  first 
sin,  and  the  want  of  original  righteousness, — but  any  ambiguity  in  this  respect 
is  removed  in  the  fuller  exposition  given  under  the  corresponding  Question  in 
the  Larger  Catechism,  where  it  is  plain  that  the  statement  made  as  to  the 
common  meaning  of  the  words  "original  sin,"  applies  it  only  to  the  corruption 
of  our  nature, — the  inherent  depravity  which  is  the  immediate  source  of  actual 
transgression.  "  Original  sin,  in  its  full  extent,  consists  of  three  parts,— the 
guilt  of  Adam's  first  sin,  the  want  of  original  righteousness,  and  the  corruption 
of  our  whole  nature.  This  last  is  commonly  called  original  sin,  as  being  the 
worst  part  of  it"  (Boston).  "After  the  heavenly  image  in  man  was  effaced,  he 
not  only  himself  was  punished  by  the  withdrawal  of  the  ornaments  in  which  man 
had  been  arrayed, — viz.  wisdom,  virtue,  truth,  justice,  and  holiness,  and  by  the 
substitution  in  their  place  of  those  dire  pests  blindness,  impotence,  vanity, 
impurity,  and  unrighteousness, — but  he  involved  his  posterity  also,  and  plunged 
them  in  the  same  wretchedness.  This  is  the  hereditary  corruption  to  which 
early  Christian  writers  gave  the  name  of  original  sin,  meaning  by  that  term  the 
depravation  of  a  nature  formerly  good  and  pure  "  (Calvin).  "  The  great  and 
original  principle  in  sin  is  self-love  ;  it  is  the  spirit,  the  quintessence  of  original 
sin"  (Goodwin).  (But  see  Hodge,  ii.  p,  144;  Macpherson,  Confession,  vi.  I.) 


42  THE    SHORTER    CATECHISM    WITH    A    COMMENTARY. 

"  Sky  lower'd,  and  muttering  thunder,  some  sad  drops 
Wept  at  completing  of  the  mortal  sin 
Original."  — MILTON. 

actual  transgressions — "It  is  important  to  notice  that  the  term  'actual' 
applied  to  sin  in  this  connection  is  employed  in  its  etymological  signification 
to  denote  the  sin  of  single  choices  and  distinct  acts,  in  distinction  from  the 
sin  of  the  heart,  or  natural  disposition  which  proceeds  from  it "  (Shedd). 

which  proceed  from  it.  "  From  within,  out  of  the  hearts  of  men,  proceed 
evil  thoughts,  adulteries,  fornications,  murders,  thefts,  covetousness,  wicked 
ness,  deceit,  lasciviousness,  an  evil  eye,  blasphemy,  pride,  foolishness  :  all 
these  evil  things  come  from  within  and  defile  the  man"  (Our  Lord,  instructing 
His  disciples).  "  Single  out  the  grossest  sin  thou  hast  ever  committed,  which 
hath  brought  thee  lowest  on  thy  knees,  and  hath  cost  thee  most  sighs  and 
sobs,  which  thou  hast  drenched  and  watered  with  most  tears,  and  compare  it 
with  the  evil  disposition  of  thy  heart  and  nature  which  was  the  root  that  cursed 
fruit  grew  on.  .  .  .  Take  any  poisoned  root,  and  you  will  find  the  least  piece 
of  it  hath  as  much  strength  of  poison  in  it  as  all  the  leaves  and  branches. 
...  It  hath  not  only  been  actually  the  cause  of  all  the  sins  thou  hast  com 
mitted,  but  virtually,  and  radically,  and  potentially  it  is  the  seminal  root  of 
millions  more  even  of  all  manner  of  sin  thou  never  actedst,  God  restraining 
thee,  so  that  thou  hast  seen  the  least  parts  of  the  villany  of  it "  (Goodwin's 
Unregenerate  Man's  Guiltiness}.  All  students  of  divinity  should  get  this 
foundation  book  by  heart. 

USES. — I.  At  first  sight,  and  before  experience,  one  might  well  think  that 
such  a  work  of  divine  grace  in  the  soul  as  the  new  birth  implies,  would 
eradicate  and  expel  the  corruption  and  bias  to  sin  that  come  to  us  in  our 
natural  birth.  And  there  have  been,  and  still  are,  superficial  and  heretical 
schools  in  the  Christian  Church  that  teach  this  fanciful  doctrine,  but  they 
teach  it  in  the  teeth  of  all  Scripture  and  experience.  The  truth  is,  an 
unspeakable  torture  and  wretchedness,  because  of  indwelling  and  ineradic 
able  sin,  has  always  been  a  mark  of  the  presence  of  a  deep  and  evangelical 
work  of  grace  in  the  soul. 

2.  "  Adam,  before  his  fall,  felt,  we  may  suppose,  love,  fear,  hope,  joy,  dislike, 
as  we  do  now  :  but  then  he  felt  them  only  when  he  ought  and  as  he  ought. 
.  .  .  But,  at  the  fall,'this  beautiful  order  and  peace  was  broken  up  :  the  same 
passions  remained,  but  their  use  and  action  were  changed ;  they  rushed 
into  extremes,  sometimes  excessive,  sometimes  the  reverse.     Indignation 
was   corrupted   into   wrath,  self  -  love   became   selfishness,  self-respect 
became  pride,  and  emulation,  envy  and  jealousy.     Thus  his  soul  became 
a  chaos,  and  needed  a  new  creation  "  (Newman). 

3.  Goodwin's  Unregenerate  Alan's  Guiltiness  is  a  masterly  treatise  on  the 
whole  subject. 

4.  As  to  the  "impertinence  of  talking  of  the  innocent  and  kind  actions, 
even  of  criminals  themselves,  surpassing  their  crimes  in  number,  and  of 
the  prevailing  innocence,  good  nature,  industry,  felicity,  and  cheerful 
ness  of  the  greater  part  of  mankind,"  by  those  who  either  misunderstand 
or  deny  the  doctrine  of  Original  Sin,  see  by  all  means  Jonathan  Edwards 
on  Original  Sin,  Part  i.  chap.  i.  sec.  iii. 

5.  "  If  we,  as  we  come  into  this  world,  are  truly  sinful,  and  consequently 
miserable,  he  acts  but  a.  friendly  part  to  us,  who  endeavours  fully  to 
discover  to  us  our  disease.      Whereas,   on  the  contrary,  he  acts  an 


THE    MISERY   OF   MAN'S    FALLEN    STATE.  43 

unfriendly  part  who  to  his  utmost  hides  it  from  us  :  and  so,  in  effect,  does 
what  in  him  lies  to  prevent  our  seeking  a  remedy  for  that  which,  if 
not  remedied  in  time,  must  bring  us  finally  to  shame  and  everlasting 
contempt,  and  end  in  perfect  and  remediless  destruction  hereafter  " 
(Edwards). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  To  whom  do  we  owe  the  theological  phrase  Original  Sin? 

2.  Point  out  the  grammatical  ambiguity  in  the  Answer  to   Question   18 ;  and  state 
what  Original  Sin  strictly  denotes  according  to  our  Standards. 

3.  Explain  the  saying :  In  Adam  the  person  corrupted  the  nature,  hut  in  his 
children  the  nature  corrupts  the  person. 

4.  Giue  the  leading  passages  where  Scripture  employs  the  metaphor  of  corruption 
to  set  forth  sin. 

5.  Exhibit  some  reasons    why   repentance    and    humiliation  are  due  from  us  on 
account  of  original  sin. 

6.  Explain  the  saying  of  Seneca :  All  vices  are  in  all,  hut  all  are  not  extant  in 
all. 

7.  Explain  Pascal's  saying:  There  will  always  he  Pelagians  and  Augustinians  in 
the  world :  the  first  birth  produces  the  one,  the  second  birth  produces  the  other. 

8.  Connect  the  third  and  fourth  clauses  vo/  this  Answer  with  the  fourth  and  fifth 
Clauses  of  Answer  10. 


Q.  19.    What  is  the  misery  of  that  estate  whereinto  man  fell? 

A.  All  mankind  by  their  fall  lost  communion  with  God,6  are 
under  his  wrath  and  curse/  and  so  made  liable  to  all  miseries  in 
this  life,  to  death  itself,  and  to  the  pains  of  hell  for  ever.s 

e  Gen.  iii.  8  :  .  .  .  Adam  and  his  wife  hid  themselves  from  the  presence  of  the 
Lord  God.  Ver.  10 :  And  he  said,  I  heard  thy  voice  in  the  garden,  and  I  was 
afraid,  because  I  was  naked  ;  and  I  hid  myself.  Ver.  24  :  So  he  drove  out  the 
man  :  and  he  placed  at  the  east  of  the  garden  of  Eden  cherubims  and  a  flaming 
sword  which  turned  every  way,  to  keep  the  way  of  the  tree  of  life. 

f  Eph.  ii.  3  :  .  .  .  by  nature  the  children  of  wrath,  even  as  others.  Gal.  iii.  10: 
For  as  many  as  are  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse :  for  it  is  written, 
Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book 
of  the  law  to  do  them. 

s  Lam.  iii.  39 :  Wherefore  doth  a  living  man  complain,  a  man  for  the  punish 
ment  of  his  sins  ?  Rom.  vi.  23  :  For  the  wages  of  sin  is  death.  Matt.  xxv.  41 : 
Then  shall  he  say  also  unto  them  on  the  left  hand,  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed, 
into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels.  Ver.  46 :  And  these 
shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment. 


AU  mankind  by  their  fall— On  "The  Fall,"  see  Answer  13. 

lost  communion  with  God — Communion  is  only  possible  when  there  is 
comnmnity  of  mind,  when  the  communing  minds  are  animated  by  the  same 
spirit.  Now,  though  the  Catechism  does  not  put  it  in  this  way,  yet  the  great 
loss  that  man  suffered  by  his  fall  was  just  the  loss  and  withdrawal  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  whose  indwelling  constituted  and  sustained  the  image  of  God  in  the 
human  heart.  Hence  it  is  part  of  the  apostolic  benediction  that  the  "  com 
munion  of  the  Holv  Ghost"  be  with  all  over  whom  it  is  pronounced.  He 


44  THE    SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

left  the  soul  of  man  at  the  fall,  and  he  is  restored  in  regeneration  and  union 
to  Christ  our  Second  Head.  "  Communion  with  God  is  by  faith  in  the 
understanding  and  love  in  the  will"  (Goodwin). 

wrath  and  curse— Wrath,  Old  English,  anger,  indignation.  "  People 
that  are  but  little  acquainted  with  the  terrors  of  the  Divine  Wrath  are  not 
much  afraid  of  trifling  with  their  Maker.  For  my  own  part,  I  would  sooner 
take  Empedocles'  leap  and  fling  myself  into  Mount  Etna,  than  I  would  do  it  in 
the  slightest  instance,  were  I  in  circumstances  to  make  an  election.  Wrath  in 
comparison  with  mercy  is  but  slightly  touched  upon  in  Scripture,  because  it  is 
not  so  much  a  discovery  of  wrath  as  of  forgiveness  "  (Cowper).  "  Curse, 
Swedish  kors  (cross)  !  interjection  ;  A.S.  corsian,  to  execrate  by  the  sign  of 
the  cross"  (Wedgwood).  "The  verb  from  which  the  word  comes  denotes 
to  cut  off,  thence  to  devote,  to  withdraw  from  common  use,  and  consecrate  to 
God  =  sacrare.  The  word  itself,  used  actively,  means  the  devotement  of  any 
thing  by  Jehovah,  His  putting  it  under  a  ban,  the  result  of  which  is  destruction. 
.  .  .  And  passively  the  word  denotes  the  thing  devoted^  doomed,  laid  under  the 
ban."  (See  Maclear's  scholarly  note  on  Josh.  vi.  17.  See  also  Cruden's  analysis 
under  the  word.  Cruden  is  always  as  excellent  as  he  is  unambitious.) 

miseries  in  this  life — "  Miser,  an  avaricious  man,  niggard.  It  some 
times  means  merely  a  wretched  creature,  as  in  Spencer.  Probably  connected 
with  Greek  misos,  hatred,  from  which  Lat.  miseria,  wretchedness"  (Skeat). 
"  What  are  the  punishments  of  sin  in  this  world  ? — The  punishments  of  sin  in 
this  world  are  either  inward,  as  blindness  of  mind,  a  reprobate  sense,  strong 
delusions,  hardness  of  heart,  horror  of  conscience,  and  vile  affections  :  or 
outward,  as  the  curse  of  God  upon  the  creatures  for  our  sakes,  and  all  the 
other  evils  that  befall  us  in  our  bodies,  names,  estates,  relations,  and  em 
ployments  :  together  with  death  itself"  (Larger  Catechism).  (See  a  sternly 
humorous  passage  in  Edwards  in  refutation  of  the  Pelagian  frivolity  that  the 
curse  lies  upon  the  ground,  but  not  upon  man,  Gen.  iii.  17.) 

Plutarch  says  that  Homer  attributes  to  man  the  unhappy  primacy  of  having 
the  superiority  in  miseries  : — 

"  What  wretched  creatures  of  what  wretched  kind, 
Than  man  more  weak,  calamitous  and  blind  ! " 

"  I  now  must  change 

These  notes  to  tragic  •.  foul  distrust,  and  breach 
Disloyal  on  the  part  of  man,  revolt, 
And  disobedience  :  on  the  part  of  heaven, 
Now  alienated,  distance  and  distaste, 
Anger  and  just  rebuke,  and  judgment  giv'n, 
That  brought  into  this  world  a  world  of  woe, 
Sin  and  his  shadow  Death,  and  Misery, 
Death's  harbinger." — MILTON. 

death  itself— Jas.  i.  15. 

"Thou  therefore  on  these  herbs,  and  fruits,  and  flowers 
Feed  first  ;  on  each  beast  next,  and  fish,  and  fowl ; 
No  homely  morsels  ;  and  whatever  thing 
The  scythe  of  Time  mows  down,  devour  unspared  ; 
Till  I  in  man  residing  through  the  race, 
His  thoughts,  his  looks,  words,  actions,  all  infect, 
And  season  him  thy  last  and  greatest  prey." 

— SIN  to  DEATH  in  Paradise  Lost. 

"Men  look  upon  death  as  the  extreme  limit  of  all  punishments,  but  in  the 
view  of  the  divine  tribunal  it  is  scarcely  the  beginning  of  them  "  (Philo). 


THE   COVENANT   OF   GRACE.  45 

pains  of  hell  for  ever.  "  Pain,  French  peine,  pain,  penalty,  punishment. 
From^HZtia,  retribution,  a  word  which,  from  the  prominence  of  the  idea  in 
religious  teaching,  would  readily  be  carried  into  all  European  languages  " 
(Wedgwood).  "Hell,  the  place  of  the  dead  ;  the  abode  of  evil  spirits.  .  .  . 
From  a  Teutonic  base  hal,  to  hide.  So  that  the  original  sense  is  the 
hidden  or  unseen  place  "  (Skeat).  "  I  wish  you  could  but  lay  your  ears  to  hell, 
that  standing  as  it  were  behind  the  screen,  you  might  hear  sin  spoken  of  in 
its  own  dialect  by  the  oldest  sons  of  perdition  there ;  to  hear  what  Cain  says 
of  murdering  his  brother  Abel ;  what  Saul  says  of  persecuting  David  and  the 
priests  of  Jehovah  ;  what  Balaam  and  Ahithophel  say  of  their  cursed  counsels 
and  policies  ;  what  Ahab  says  of  his  oppression  of  Naboth  ;  and  what  Judas 
says  of  treason;  and  indeed  hear  how  the  least  sin  is  there  spoken  of" 
(Goodwin). 

"  Regions  of  sorrow,  doleful  shades,  where  peace 

And  rest  can  never  dwell,  hope  never  comes 

That  comes  to  all." — MILTON.     See  ii.  570-628. 
Cf.  Dante:  — 

"  Through  me  you  pass  into  the  city  of  woe  : 

Through  me  you  pass  into  eternal  pain : 

Through  me  among  the  people  lost  for  aye. 

Before  me  things  create  were  none,  save  things 

Eternal,  and  eternal  I  endure. 

All  hope  abandon  ye  who  enter  here." — Inferno,  iii. 


QUESTIONS, 
''elagian  interpre; 

2.  Explain  Satan's  cry :  Which  way  I  fly  is  hell :  myself  am  hell. 


7.  Exhibit  the  shallowness  of  the  Pelagian  interpretation  that  the  curse  does  not  lie  on 
man,  but  on  the  ground.    Gen.  iii.  17. 


Q.  20.  Did  God  leave  all  mankind  to  perish  in  the  estate  of  sin 
and  misery  ? 

A.  God  having,  out  of  his  mere  good  pleasure,  from  all 
eternity,  elected  some  to  everlasting  life,h  did  enter  into  a  cove 
nant  of  grace,  to  deliver  them  out  of  the  estate  of  sin  and  misery, 
and  to  bring  them  into  an  estate  of  salvation  by  a  Redeemer.1 

h  Eph.  i.  4 :  According  as  he  hath  chosen  us  in  him  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world,  that  we  should  be  holy  and  without  blame  before  him  in  love. 

1  Rom.  iii.  21 :  But  now  the  righteousness  of  God  without  the  law  is  manifested, 
being  witnessed  by  the  law  and  the  prophets.  Ver.  22  :  Even  the  righteousness  of 
God  which  is  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  unto  all  and  upon  all  them  that  believe. 
Gal.  iii.  22 :  That  the  promise  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  might  be  given  to  them 
that  believe. 

With  this  question  we  enter  on  the  region  of  Christologyt  the  doctrine  of 
Christ,  or  Soteriology>  the  doctrine  of  salvation,  "  the  Immanuel's  Land  of 
theology."  "  We  have  already  sailed  over  one  sea,  that  of  man's  corruption, 
a  dead  sea,  as  I  may  call  it ;  and  we  are  now  entering  into  another,  a  far- 
vaster  and  deeper,  of  God's  love  and  free  grace  "  (Introduction  to  Goodwin's 
Sermon  on  Eph.  ii.  4). 


46  THE   SHORTER    CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

mere  good  pleasure — "  Of  His  mere  love  and  mercy  "  (Larger  Catechism). 
The  Scriptures  always  trace  up  man's  salvation  to  the  sovereign  grace  of 
God.  Christ  Himself  is  the  gift  of  the  Father.  "  Herein  is  love,  not  that 
we  loved  God,  but  that  He  loved  us,  and  sent  His  Son  to  be  the  propitiation 
for  our  sins."  "The  Apostle  Paul  saw  as  deeply  as  any  other  man  the 
difficulty  of  making  salvation  depend  on  the  elective  love  of  God,  but  he  saw 
more  deeply  the  difficulty  of  making  it  depend  on  anything  else.  .  .  .  There 
may  be  difficulties  in  referring  salvation  to  the  election  of  God,  but  there  are 
still  greater  difficulties  in  trying  to  refer  it  to  the  election  of  man  "  (Moore). 

elected  some  to  everlasting  life— The  first  time  this  word  occurs  in  the 
Bible,  it  is  already  put  to  its  very  highest  use.  It  is  applied  by  Jehovah  in 
Isaiah  to  the  Messiah  Himself:  "Mine  elect,  in  whom  my  soul  delighteth." 
And  another  passage  taken  out  of  the  same  prophet  is  by  an  apostle  applied 
to  our  Lord,  "Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  a  chief  corner-stone,  elect,  precious." 
Jesus  Christ  is  thus  described  in  both  Testaments  as  God's  elect.  The  unfallen 
angels  are  also  characterized  by  this  lofty  title,  as  in  the  apostolic  commission 
to  Timothy  :  "  I  charge  thee  before  God,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the 
elect  angels. "  Israel  as  God's  people  are  often  called  by  this  distinguishing 
name  (Isa.  xlv.  4,  Ixv.  9).  In  the  New  Testament  this  designation  is  applied 
to  all  true  believers,  as  in  Rom.  viii.  33  :  "  Who  shall  lay  anything  to 
the  charge  of  God's  elect  V  And  as  the  designation  is  made  a  ground  of 
comfort  to  the  Roman  Christians,  so  is  it  used  as  a  ground  of  counsel  to  the 
Church  at  Colossae  :  "  Put  on  therefore,  as  the  elect  of  God,  holy  and  beloved, 
bowels  of  mercies."  And  lastly,  the  word  is  applied  to  persons  eminent  for 
the  display  of  the  Christian  graces,  as  in  John's  Second  Epistle  :  "  The 
elder  unto  the  elect  lady  ;"  and  again  :  "The  children  of  thine  elect  sister." 
"Such  is  the  great  scheme  of  doctrine  known  in  history  as  the  Pauline, 
Augustinian,  or  Calvinistic,  taught,  as  we  believe,  in  the  Scriptures,  de 
veloped  by  Augustine,  formally  sanctioned  by  the  Latin  Church,  adhered  to 
by  the  witnesses  of  the  truth  in  the  Middle  Ages  ;  repudiated  by  the  Church 
of  Rome  in  the  Council  of  Trent,  received  in  that  Church  by  the  Jansenists, 
adopted  by  all  the  Reformers,  incorporated  by  all  the  creeds  of  the  Protestant 
Churches  of  Switzerland,  France,  Holland,  England,  and  Scotland,  and 
unfolded  in  the  Standards  of  the  Westminster  Assembly,  the  common  repre 
sentative  of  all  Presbyterians  in  Europe  and  America  "  (Hodge). 

some  —  Dr.  Morison's  explanation  in  another  connection  is  applicable 
here  :  ' '  The  distinction  is  not  between  some  and  many,  but  between  some 
and  all ;  for  even  many  are  only  some,  if  they  are  not  #//." 

a  covenant  of  grace — See  under  covenant,  Answer  12. 

Grace  means  favour,  mercy,  pardon.  (Students  should  see  Dr.  Morison's 
note,  "Grace,  Philologically  viewed,"  in  the  Expositor  for  July  1880.) 
Grace  and  love  are  essentially  the  same,  only  grace  is  love  manifesting  itself 
and  operating  under  certain  conditions,  and  adapting  itself  to  certain  circum 
stances.  As,  for  instance,  love  has  no  limit  or  law  such  as  grace  has.  Love 
may  exist  between  equals,  or  it  may  rise  to  rtiose  above  us,  or  flow  down  to 
those  in  any  way  beneath  us.  But  grace,  from  its  nature,  has  only  one 
direction  it  can  take.  Grace  always  floxvs  down,  Grace  is  love  indeed,  but 
it  is  love  humbling  itself.  A  king's  love  to  his  equals,  or  to  his  own  royal 
house,  is  love  :  but  his  love  to  his  subjects  is  called  grace.  And  thus  it  is 
that  God's  love  to  sinners  is  always  called  grace  in  the  Scriptures.  It  is  love 


THE   COVENANT   OF   GRACE.  47 

indeed,  but  it  is  love  to  creatures,  and  to  creatures  who  do  not  deserve  His 
love.  And  therefore  all  He  does  for  us  in  Chiist,  and  all  that  is  disclosed  to 
us  of  His  goodwill  in  the  gospel,  is  called  grace.  (See  Owen's  or  Goodwin's 
Index,  under  grace.  See  Confession,  vii.) 

"  The  covenant  of  grace  was  made  with  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  Second  Adam, 
party-contractor  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  3  ;  I  Cor.  xv.  45  ;  Rom.  v.  15-21  ;  Gal.  iii.  16). 
And  Christ,  in  this  covenant,  represented  all  the  elect,  as  the  spiritual  race, 
the  parties  contracted  for.  Then  the  covenant  of  redemption  and  the 
covenant  of  grace  are  not  two  distinct  covenants,  but  two  names  of  one 
covenant  under  different  considerations.  By  a  covenant  of  redemption  is 
meant  a  bargain  of  buying  and  selling  ;  and  the  second  covenant  was  such  a 
covenant  to  Christ  only  (i  Pet.  i.  18,  19).  By  a  covenant  of  grace  is  meant  a 
bargain  whereby  all  is  to  be  had  freely ;  and  it  is  such  a  covenant  to  poor 
sinners  only  (Isa.  Iv.  i)"  (Boston). 

"  Dear  Charles, — My  dear  love  to  thee,  and  to  my  dear  Biddy,  who  is 
a  joy  to  my  heart,  for  what  I  hear  of  the  Lord  in  her.  Bid  her  be  joyful  and 
rejoice  in  the  Lord  once  and  again  :  if  she  knows  the  covenant,  she  cannot 
but  do  so.  For  that  transaction  is  without  her:  sure  and  stedfast,  between 
the  Father  and  the  Mediator  in  His  blood  ;  therefore,  leaning  upon  the  Son, 
or  looking  to  Him,  thirsting  after  Him,  and  embracing  Him,  we  are  His 
seed  :  and  the  covenant  is  sure  to  all  the  seed.  The  compact  is  for  the  seed  ; 
God  is  bound  in  faithfulness  to  Christ,  and  in  Him  to  us ;  the  covenant 
is  without  us :  a  transaction  between  God  and  Christ.  Look  up  to  it.  God 
engageth  in  it  to  pardon  us  :  to  write  His  law  in  our  hearts  :  to  plant  His  fear 
so  as  we  shall  never  depart  from  Him  "  (Carlyle's  Cromwell,  Letter  cxxix.). 

by  a  Kedeemer.  By  one  who  is  to  buy  us  back,  ransom  us,  make  atone 
ment  for  us.  Who  He  is,  and  how  He  does  His  redeeming  work,  will 
immediately  appear. 

"The  doctrines  of  God's  absolute  sovereignty  and  free  grace  in  showing 
mercy  on  whom  He  would  show  mercy,  and  man's  absolute  dependence  on 
the  operations  of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  have  very  often  appeared  to  me  as 
sweet  and  most  glorious  doctrines.  These  doctrines  have  been  made  my 
delight.  ...  I  have  loved  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel ;  they  have  been  to 
my  soul  like  green  pastures.  The  way  of  salvation  by  Christ  has  appeared 
most  glorious  and  excellent,  most  pleasant  and  most  beautiful.  It  has  often 
seemed  to  me  that  it  would  in  a  great  measure  spoil  heaven  to  receive  it  in 
any  other  way  "  (Jonathan  Edwards'  Personal  Narrative}. 

USES. — i.  "  The  doctrine  of  this  high  mystery  is  to  be  handled  with  special 
prudence  and  care,  that  men  attending  to  the  will  of  God  in  His  word, 
and  yielding  obedience  thereto,  may,  from  the  certainty  of  their  effectual 
vocation,  be  assured  of  their  eternal  election"  (Confession,  iii.  8). 

2.  "  Chosen  to  be  holy  and  without  blame  ;  "  "  ordained  unto  good  works  ; " 
"elect  unto  obedience."  This  is  the  end  of  election.  It  is  not  to  any 
earthly  dignity  or  worldly  glory.  It  is  not  to  any  possession  or  privilege 
that  other  men  will  envy  them,  for  all  men  may  have  the  portion  of  the 
elect  if  they  choose.  Election  bars  no  man  from  blessedness  ;  it  only 
secures  its  own  subjects  that  they  shall  not  come  short  of  it.  Election 
is  not  in  any  sense  a  decree  of  exclusion  ;  its  whole  design  is  to  be  an 
instrument  of  security.  Election  shuts  no  one  out ;  but  it  is  so  contrived 
that  it  shuts  the  elect  effectually  in. 


48  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

3.  And  just  as  holiness  is  a  certain  issue  of  election,  so  holiness  is  the  only 
sure  evidence  of  election. 

4.  "  Can  you  give  yourself  to  Jesus  Christ  to  be  saved  by  Him  ?    Then  were 
you  given  to  Him  to  be  redeemed  by  Him.     Your  faith  on  Him  speaks 
your  election  in  Him.     True  faith  is  'the  faith  of  God's  elect '  (Tit.  i.  i). 
Go  on  in  trusting  Him,  and  in  living  by  faith  on  Him,  and  He  will  make 
you  know  that  He  loved  you,  and  gave  Himself  for  you  "  (Robert  Traill). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Remark  on  Whately's  words :  The  preacher,  in  short,  is  to  act,  in  all  respects, 
as  if  the  doctrine  of  election  were  not  true.    Consult  Cunningham's  criticism  in  his 
essay,  Calvinism,  and  its  Practical  Application. 

2.  Show  how  election  and  predestination  differ. 

3.  Explain  the  saying:  Election  depends  not  on  good  works,  but  good    works 
depend  on  election. 

4.  Give  the  root  idea  of  the  name  Redeemer.     Trace  the  rise  and  growth  of  the 
name  in  Scripture. 

5.  The  whole  Scripture,  and  all  divine  institutions  from  the  beginning,  do  testify 
that  this  way  of  God  for  the  saving  of  sinners  is  by  commutation,  substitution, 
atonement,  satisfaction,  and  imputation  (Owen,  v.  409).      Consult  Answers  25,  27, 
33,  and  86;  and  then  explain  and  support  from  Scripture  the  above  description  of 
the  Redeemer's  work. 

6.  Explain  the  redemption  of  the  body  (Rom,  uiii.  23),  and  the  redemption  of  the 
purchased  possession  (Eph.  i.  14). 

7.  Explain  and  distinguish  love,  grace,  and  mercy,  and  show  reasons  why  the  Scrip 
tures  never  say  God  is  grace,  or  God  is  mercy. 

8.  Explain  Christology  and  Soteriology,  and  derive  and  show  the  application  of  Dr. 
Pope's  happy  phrase :  The  Immanuel's  Land  of  theology. 


Q.  2 1.    Who  is  the  Redeemer  of  God's  elect  ? 

A.  The  only  Redeemer  of  God's  elect  is  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  J  who,  being  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  became  man,k  and 
so  was,  and  continueth  to  be,  God  and  man  in  two  distinct 
natures,  and  one  person,  for  ever.1 

J  i  Tim.  ii.  5  :  For  there  is  one  God,  and  one  mediator  between  God  and  men, 
the  man  Christ  Jesus.  Ver.  6  :  Who  gave  himself  a  ransom  for  all,  to  be  testified 
in  due  time. 

kjohn  i.  14:  And  the  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us,  (and  we 
beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father, )  full  of  grace  and 
truth.  Gal.  iv.  4  :  But  when  the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come,  God  sent  forth  his 
Son,  made  of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law. 

1  Rom.  ix.  5  :  Christ  .  .  .  who  is  over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever.  Amen.  Luke 
i.  35  :  .  .  .  that  holy  thing,  which  shall  be  born  ef  thee,  shall  be  called  the  Son 
of  God.  Col.  ii.  9 :  For  in  him  dvvelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily. 
Heb.  vii.  24  :  But  this  man,  because  he  continueth  ever,  hath  an  unchangeable 
priesthood.  Ver.  25  :  Wherefore  he  is  able  also  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost 
that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them. 

The  metaphor  of  purchase,  ransom,  redemption,  runs  through  the  whole  of 
Scripture,  and  supplies  to  Scripture  much  of  its  most  instructive  and  impres- 
vsive  language.  So  deeply,  indeed,  is  this  idea  of  redemption  seated  in  the 


THE    REDEEMER    OF    GOD'S    ELECT.  49 

whole  conception  of  our  need  of  salvation,  and  in  the  divine  way  of  accom 
plishing  it,  that  it  is  a  question  whether  it  is  not  more  than  a  metaphor,  and 
whether  it  is  not  of  the  very  essence  of  the  whole  transaction.  The  student  will 
be  interested  and  instructed  and  impressed  by  tracing  the  growth  and  contents 
of  the  name  Redeemer  from  its  first  Hebrew  appropriation  by  Jehovah  down  to 
its  fullest  Christian  application  to  Jesus  Christ.  He  will  take  note  also  of  the 
wealth  of  argument  and  illustration  and  adoration  this  conception  supplies  to 
the  New  Testament  writers. 

The  only  Kedeemer  —  Cf.  the  Confession,  chap,  viii.,  "Of  Christ  the 
Mediator  ;  "  and  Larger  Catechism,  Question  36. 

the  Lord — Owner,  ruler,  master.  Our  Redeemer  is  called  our  Lord  for 
two  reasons.  First,  He  has  a  lordship  founded  on  His  Divine  Nature.  He 
owns  us  and  commands  us  because  He  created  us.  He  made  us,  and  not  we 
ourselves.  But  He  holds  another  lordship  over  us  that  touches  us,  if  possible, 
still  closer  than  that — a  lordship  grounded  not  so  much  on  His  divinity  as 
on  His  humanity.  This  is  something  added  to  His  original  power  over  us. 
He  holds  a  lordship  over  us  as  the  recompense  and  result  of  all  He  did  and 
does  for  us  as  our  Redeemer.  This  lordship  is  pointed  at  in  such  psssages 
as  John  iii.  35,  xiii.  3,  xvii.  2  ;  Acts  ii.  36  ;  Phil.  ii.  9,  1 1.  This  lordship  of 
Jesus  Christ  is  one  of  the  principal  themes  of  apostolic  preaching. 

Jesus — Heb.  Jeshua  (Neh.  viii.  17),  another  form  of  Joshua,  which  again 
is  contracted  from  Jehoshua  (Num.  xiii.  16),  signifying  Help  of  Jehovah,  a 
Saviour.  "Thou  shalt  call  His  name  JESUS  ;  for  He  shall  save  His  people 
from  their  sins."  There  was  no  dispute  about  our  Lord's  right  to  bear  the 
name  Jesus.  Mary  called  her  first-born  Jesus,  just  as  Elizabeth  called  her 
child  John.  The  "carpenter's  son"  was  known  among  the  children  of 
Nazareth  as  Jesus  the  son  of  Joseph.  He  bore  a  well-known  name,  but  He 
bore  it  as  no  other  son  of  man  had  ever  borne  it  before  Him.  Gabriel  took 

Joseph  back  to  the  original  meaning  of  the  name  when  he  came  to  command 
im  so  to  designate  the  child  about  to  be  put  under  his  charge.  The  angel 
explained  the  name,  and  attached  it,  in  its  fresh  and  original  sense,  to  the 
child  that  was  to  be  born  in  Joseph's  house.  It  had  lost  all  its  meaning,  as 
generations  of  children  so  named  had  heard  it  called  and  had  answered  to  it  ; 
but  all  its  original  force  was  fulfilled,  and  far  more  than  fulfilled  in  Him  who 
was  henceforth  to  bear  it,  and  acknowledge  it,  and  glorify  it. 

Christ  — The  Greek  word  Christos  transliterated  into  English.  The 
Anointed  One,  from  chrio,  to  anoint.  Christ  is  the  Greek  and  English  equi 
valent  for  the  Hebrew  Messiah.  The  office  of  the  Messiah  was  so  named  and 
described  in  Old  Testament  prophecy  long  before  the  Person  appeared  who 
was  to  fill  the  office  and  bear  the  name  in  history.  Of  the  two  names  Jes^ls 
Christ  our  Lord  bears,  the  one  is  His  personal  name,  and  the  other  is  His  official 
name.  His  official  name,  the  Messiah,  the  Christ,  was  as  familiar  to  the 
Old  Testament  Church  as  it  is  to  us ;  only,  they  could  not  in  their  time  attach 
it  to  any  given  person.  Their  progress  accordingly,  as  Bengel  says,  was  from 
the  Christ  to  Jesus,  from  the  office  to  the  official  person  ;  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  progress  of  the  apostolic  believers  was  made  just  the  other  way. 
The  Jews  in  our  Lord's  day  saw  and  heard  Jesus  of  Nazareth  j  but  the  ques 
tion  and  invitation  continually  put  to  them  was  this  :  Did  they  accept  and 
acknowledge  Jesus  as  "the  Christ"?  That  the  Christ  is  coming  was  the 

D 


50  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

faith  and  hope  of  Moses   and  Isaiah  ;   that  Jesus  is  the   Christ   was  the 
preaching  of  Peter  and  Paul. 

On  John  xvii.  3,  Stier  says  :  "  The  apostolical  custom  of  using  Jesus  Christ 
as  one  double  appellative,  making  Christ  also  a  proper  name,  had  its  origin 
in  this  word  of  our  Lord.  Speak  of  Him  as  He  spoke  of  Himself  before 
God — this  was  the  Spirit's  suggestion  to  their  minds."  (But  see  Westcott. ) 
"  Christ  is  no  single  term,  but  in  that  name  which  is  one  is  the  significa 
tion  both  of  Godhead  and  manhood.  Wherefore  Christ  is  called  man,  and 
Christ  is  called  God  ;  and  Christ  is  both  God  and  man,  and  Christ  is  One  " 
(Athanasius). 

who,  being  the  eternal  Son  of  God— See  Answer  6.  "  Theology,  led 
by  Origen,  introduced  the  paraphrase  of  the  '  Eternal  Son,'  and  with  strict 
propriety,  since  all  the  interior  relations  of  the  Godhead  are  of  necessity 
eternal  "  (Pope).  "His  Son  Jesus  Christ  is  a  compressed  creed  "  (Westcott). 

Originally  and  eternally  the  Redeemer  was  with  God,  and  was  God ;  but 
He  was  God  under  the  character  and  relation  of  a  Son.  There  are  three 
Persons  in  the  Godhead,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  it 
is  He  who  is  always  designated  the  Son  that  we  have  here  to  do  with.  "  Thou 
art  my  Son,"  says  the  eternal  Father,  "this  day  have  I  begotten  Thee." 
Again,  we  read  that  the  Son  is  eternally  in  the  bosom  of -the  Father,  and  that 
as  such  He  is  the  Father's  only  begotten.  Now  all  this  is  plainly  designed 
to  teach  us  that  there  is  a  mysterious  communication  of  the  Divine  Nature 
from  the  Father,  the  First  Person,  to  the  Son,  the  Second  ;  an  inscrutable  and 
ineffable  communication  continually  going  on,  that  can  only  be  conveyed  to 
our  minds  under  the  figure  of  human  generation.  The  Holy  Ghost  points  us 
to  earthly  fatherhood  and  earthly  sonship  as  being  the  entirely  inadequate 
but  only  available  illustration  of  that  eternal  relation  within  the  Godhead  by 
which  the  First  Person  conveys  the  Divine  Nature  to  the  Second.  As  the 
Father  hath  life  in  Himself,  so  hath  He  given  to  the  Son  to  have  life  in  Him 
self.  The  Son  has  His  Being  of  the  Father,  just  as,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
Father  has  His  Being  of  Himself  alone.  The  Son  therefore  is  God,  because 
He  is  begotten  of  God  the  Father  ;  and  being  so  begotten,  He  is  revealed  to 
us  under  the  denomination,  description,  and  character  of  the  Son.  "And 
first  they  had  him  into  the  study,  where  they  showed  him  records  of  the 
greatest  antiquity  ;  in  which,  as  I  remember  my  dream,  they  showed  him  first 
the  Pedigree  of  the  Lord  of  the  Hill,  that  he  was  the  son  of  the  Antient  of 
Days,  and  came  by  an  eternal  generation "  (Bunyan).  (Consult  Dr.  David 
son's  note  on  THE  SON  in  his  Hebrews  in  the  present  series.) 

became  man — "  And  the  Word  was  made  flesh."  "  The  loftiest  sentence 
ever  penned  by  human  hand  "  (Godet).  God  sent  forth  His  Son,  made  of  a 
woman.  In  theological  phrase,  the  Incarnation.  "  Christology  has  its  own 
distinct  range  of  theological  coinage.  Its  highest  achievement  here  is  the 
term  Theamhropos,  Deus-homo,  God-man  ;  and  with  this  it  boldly  utters  the 
secret  of  the  whole  Bible.  It  long  faltered  and  hesitated  in  the  choice  of  a 
word  that  should  express  the  holy  bond  between  the  Divinity  and  the 
manhood  ;  after  many  experiments  it  1'ested  on  the  word  Incarnation,  which 
is  the  slightest  possible  deviation  from  the  very  word  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
through  St.  John,  '  He  was  made  flesh  '  "  (Pope). 

We  are  men,  and  the  children  of  men,  and  to  say  that  any  one  "became 
man  "  just  means  that  he  became  like  us,  became  one  of  us.  This  then  is 
the  "mystery  of  godliness  ;  "  this  is  the  Incarnation  of  the  eternal  Son  ;  this 


51 

is  the  foundation  of  all  our  Christian  hope,  "The  Word  was  made  flesh,  and 
dwelt  among  us."  "  Still,  we  must  ever  remember,  that  though  He  was  in 
nature  perfect  man,  He  was  not  man  in  exactly  the  same  sense  in  which  any 
one  of  us  is  a  man.  Though  man,  He  was  not,  strictly  speaking,  in  the 
English  sense  of  the  word,  a  man  ;  He  was  not  such  as  one  of  us,  and  one 
out  of  a  number.  His  Person  was  not  human  like  ours,  but  divine.  He  who 
was  from  eternity,  continued  one  and  the  same,  but  with  an  addition.  His 
Incarnation  was  a  'taking  of  the  manhood  into  God'  .  .  .  He  was  not  a  man 
made  God,  but  God  made  man"  (Newman).  "  Our  nature  in  Him,  as  it  is 
human,  is  not  circumscribed  or  enclosed  with  a  proper  subsistence  of  its  own, 
but  lies  like  a  field  unenclosed,  not  hedged  in  with  personality  as  all  our 
natures  are  "  (Goodwin). 

two  distinct  natures — "Two  natures  met  together  in  our  Redeemer,  and, 
while  the  proprieties  of  each  remained,  so  great  a  unity  was  made  of  either  sub 
stance,  that  from  the  time  that  the  Word  was  made  flesh  in  the  blessed  Virgin's 
womb,  we  may  neither  think  of  Him  as  God  without  that  which  is  man,  nor 
as  man  without  that  which  is  God.  Each  nature  certifies  its  own  reality 
under  distinct  actions,  but  neither  disjoins  itself  from  connection  with  the 
other.  Nothing  is  wanting  from  either  towards  other.  There  is  entire 
littleness  in  majesty,  entire  majesty  in  littleness ;  unity  does  not  introduce 
confusion,  nor  does  propriety  divide  unity.  There  is  one  thing  passible, 
another  inviolable,  yet  his  is  the  contumely  whose  is  the  glory.  He  is  in 
infirmity  who  is  in  power  ;  the  same  is  both  capable  and  conqueror  of  death. 
God  then  did  take  on  Him  whole  man,  and  did  so  unite  Himself  unto  him, 
and  him  unto  Himself,  in  pity  and  in  power,  that  either  nature  was  in  other, 
and  neither  in  the  other  lost  its  propriety"  (Leo).  "In  Christ  therefore 
God  and  man,  'there  is,'  saith  Paschasius,  'a  twofold  substance,  not  a  two 
fold  Person,  because  one  person  extinguisheth  another,  whereas  one  nature 
in  another  cannot  become  extinct.'  For  the  personal  being  which  the  Son  ot 
God  already  had,  suffered  not  the  substance  to  be  personal  which  He  took, 
although  together  with  the  nature  which  He  had,  the  nature  also  which  He 
took  continueth"  (Hooker).  "  He  of  whom  I  am  now  to  speak  is  One  that 
has  not  His  fellow.  He  has  two  Natures  in  one  Person,  plain  to  be  dis 
tinguished,  impossible  to  be  divided"  (Greatheart  in  Bunyan). 

one  person — On  Personality,  see  Answer  6.  "The  term  Person  as  applied 
to  our  Lord  has  a  conventional  meaning,  which  is  not  amenable  to  science,  but 
is  not  inconsistent  with  it.  In  the  true  philosophy  personality  is  not  nature  ; 
it  is  that  in  which  the  nature,  with  its  various  developments  and  forms  of 
exhibition,  inheres.  The  person  of  a  man  is  the  substratum  of  all  that 
belongs  to  his  nature,  as  consciously  his  own,  and  distinguished  from  any 
other.  The  Person  of  Christ  is  Himself,  the  substratum  of  all  that  belongs 
to  the  twofold  manner  of  existence  "  (Pope). 

for  ever.  " Inseparably  joined "  (Westminster  Confession).  "Never  to 
be  divided"  (Thirty-Nine  Articles).  "These  Natures,  from  the  moment  of 
their  first  combination,  have  been  and  are  for  ever  inseparable  "  (Hooker). 

"  I  would  not  give  the  truth  expressed  in  these  words  of  the  Catechism, 
'Two  distinct  natures  and  one  person  for  ever,'  for  all  the  truths  that  by 
human  language  have  ever  been  expressed.  I  would  rather  have  been  the 
humblest  defender  of  this  truth  in  the  four  CEcumenical  Councils  than  have 
been  the  greatest  reformer  in  the  Church,  the  father  of  the  covenant,  or  the 
procurer  of  the  English  Constitution  "  (Edward  Irving). 


52  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

USES. — i.  It  has  been  acutely  said,  that  one  obvious  use  of  the  full  and 
symmetrical  statement  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Sonship,  is  to  facilitate  to 
the  imagination  the  descent  of  a  Divine  Person  into  human  nature 
and  human  history. 

2.  "  If  any  one  is  tempted  to  consider  such  a  subject  abstruse,  speculative, 
and  unprofitable,  I  would  observe  in  answer,  that  I  have  taken  it  on  the 
veiy  ground  of  its  being,  as  I  believe,  especially  practical.  .  .  .  What 
do  we  gain  from  words,  however  correct  and  abundant,  if  they  end  with 
themselves,  instead  of  lighting  up  the  image  of  the  Incarnate  Son  in  our 
hearts?  In  truth,  His  Divine  Sonship  is  that  portion  of  the  sacred 
doctrine  on  which  the  mind  is  providentially  intended  to  rest  throughout, 
and  so  to  preserve  for  itself  the  identity  unbroken  "  (Newman). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Explain  and  paraphrase  the  theological  dictum:  Our  Lord's  Sonship  is  not  only 
the  guarantee  of  His  Godhead,  but  also  the  antecedent  of  His  Incarnation. 

2.  What  is  the  meaning  of  Milton's  phrases,  Paternal  Deity,  vt.  750;  The  Filial 
Godhead,  oil.  175? 

3.  Show  that  it  is  sound  Christology  to  say  that  our  Lord's  manhood  is  impersonal. 

4.  Explain  Bengel's  statements :  From  the  Old  Testament  point  of  view,  progress 
is  made  from  the  knowledge  of  Christ  to  the  knowledge  of  Jesus ;  from  the  New 
Testament  point  of  view,  the  progress  is  from  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  to  the 
knowledge  of  Christ :  Also :  The  Church  is  never  called  the  body  of  Jesus,  or  the 
body  of  the  Lord,  but  the  body  of  Christ. 

5.  Explain   Peter's  doctrine  (Acts  ii.   36),   that  God  made  Jesus  both  Lord  and 
Christ. 

6.  Westcott  says:  The  full  title,  His  Son  Jesus  Christ,  is  a  compressed  creed. 
Explain  and  shortly  expand. 

7.  Is  it  scriptural  to  say,  God  has  a  man  in  Him? 

0 

Q.  2  2.  How  did  Christ,  being  the  Son  of  God,  become  man  ? 

A.  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  became  man,  by  taking  to  himself 
a  true  body,m-  and  a  reasonable  soul,n  being  conceived  by  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  the  womb  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  and 
born  of  her,0  yet  without  sin.p 

m  Heb.  ii.  14 :  Forasmuch  then  as  the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood, 
he  also  himself  likewise  took  part  of  the  same.  Ver.  16  :  For  verily  he  took  not 
on  him  the  nature  of  angels  ;  but  he  took  on  him  the  seed  of  Abraham.  Heb. 
x.  5  :  Wherefore,  when  he  cometh  into  the  world,  he  saith,  Sacrifice  and  offering 
thou  wouldest  not,  but  a  body  hast  thou  prepared  me. 

n  Matt.  xxvi.  38  :  Then  saith  he  unto  them,  My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful, 
even  unto  death. 

0  Luke  i.  27 :  To  a  virgin  espoused  to  a  man,  whose  name  was  Joseph,  of  the 
house  of  David  ;  and  the  virgin's  name  was  Mary.  Ver.  31  :  And,  behold,  thou 
shall  conceive  in  thy  womb,  and  bring  forth  a  son,  and  shalt  call  his  name  JESUS. 
Ver.  35  :  And  the  angel  answered  and  said  unto  her,  The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come 
upon  thee,  and  the  power  of  the  Highest  shall  overshadow  thee  :  therefore  also 
that  holy  thing,  which  shall  be  born  of  thee,  shall  be  called  the  Son  of  God. 
Ver.  42  :  Blessed  art  thou  among  women,  and  blessed  is  the  fruit  of  thy  womb. 
Gal.  iv.  4.  [See  in  the  preceding  Question,  letter  k.] 

P  Heb.  iv.  15  :  .  .  .  in  all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin.  Heb. 
vii.  26 :  For  such  an  high  priest  became  us,  who  is  holy,  harmless,  undefiled, 
separate  from  sinners. 


THE   SON   OF   GOD    BECAME   MAN.  53 

Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  became  man — "  It  was  not  that,  being  man,  He 
afterwards  became  God ;  but,  being  God,  He  afterwards  became  man " 
(Athanasius).  "  While  it  may  be  true  to  say  '  Man  is  God,'  as  well  as  to  say 
*  God  is  man,'  it  is  not  true  to  say  '  Man  became  God,'  as  it  is  to  say  'God 
became  man  ' "  (Newman). 

by  taking  to  himself — The  phrase  is  a  scriptural  one  :  "He  took  part  of 
flesh  and  blood,"  "  He  took  on  Him  the  seed  of  Abraham"  (Heb.  ii.  14,  16). 
But  when  the  Son  of  God  took  our  nature  He  did  not  circumscribe  or  enclose  it 
with  a  human  personality  like  ours.  He  took  a  true  body  and  a  reasonable 
soul  as  instruments  He  might  make  use  of  in  His  manifold  work  as.  Mediator 
between  God  and  man.  Our  manhood  is  like  a  new  attribute  added  to  the 
Godhead  of  the  Second  Person ;  it  is  a  new  avenue  of  access  and  egress  to  the 
Divine  Mind  and  Heart  of  the  Son  of  God.  Since  He  took  our  nature,  His 
capacity  for  feeling  and  affection  has  been  enlarged,  and  His  ability  to  act  for 
us  has  been  increased.  And  hence  our  nature  endowed,  ennobled,  and  glori 
fied  in  Him  above  all  conception  of  ours  is  after  all  but  a  means  to  an  end. 
For  nothing  of  knowledge  or  experience  or  sympathy  that  enters  into  or  is 
awakened  within  our  Lord's  Human  Nature  remains  stored  up  there,  it  all 
passes  on  to  become  motive  to  move  the  Divine  Will,  and  awake  the  Divine 
Arm.  And  hence  also  the  everlasting  love  that  was  in  the  Godhead  comes 
out  now  on  the  world  in  the  form  of  the  manhood  love  of  Jesus  Christ.  He 
who  loved  us  and  loves  us  is  the  Eternal  and  Unchangeable  God,  but  since 
the  Incarnation  He  loves  us  with  a  love  that  has  all  those  and  all  their  kindred 
attributes  in  it,  with  this  new  attribute  added,  that  it  is  now  human,  made 
human  by  rising  up  within  and  running  toward  us  through  the  human  heart  of 
the  Incarnate  Son.  All  the  indescribable  attributes  of  Divine  Love,  and  all 
the  lovely  and  familiar,  tender  and  yearning  attributes  of  human  love  are 
now  mingled  together  to  make  that  new  manner  of  love,  the  love  that 
passe th  knowledge,  the  love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord. 

a  true  body — This  phrase  is  the  abiding  protest  of  the  Church  against 
an  ancient  and  deadly  heresy.  Docetism  (Greek,  to  seem,  to  put  on  the 
appearance)  taught  that  our  Lord  took  to  Him  only  the  appearance  of  a  body. 
The  Docetics  were  led  to  take  up  this  position  through  a  ruling  opinion 
they  held,  that  all  matter  was  essentially  and  irredeemably  impure.  And 
accordingly  they  believed  and  taught  that  our  Lord's  body  was  not  and  could 
not  be  real  and  true  flesh  and  blood,  like  the  bodies  of  sinful  men.  This 
great  error  was  already  showing  its  presence  in  the  Church  as  early  as  the 
days  of  the  Apostle  John.  For  it  is  against  this  false  doctrine  that  he 
directs  such  passages  as  these  :  "  We  have  seen  with  our  eyes,  we  have  looked 
upon,  and  our  hands  have  handled  the  Word  of  life."  And  again  :  "  Every 
spirit  that  confesseth  not  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh,  is  not  of  God." 
And  an  early  Father  combating  the  same  error  says  :  "  If  the  Incarnation  is  a 
phantom,  so  is  salvation."  And  hence  the  phrase  coined  for  the  early  creeds, 
and  thence  incorporated  with  our  own  Catechism  —  Christ  took  "a  true 
body."  "  That  body  which  it  hath  pleased  Him  to  make  His  own,  that  body 
wherewith  He  hath  saved  the  world,  that  body  which  hath  been,  and  is  the 
root  of  eternal  life,  the  instrument  wherewith  Deity  worketh,  the  sacrifice 
which  taketh  away  sin,  the  price  which  hath  ransomed  our  souls  from  death. 
The  leader  of  the  whole  army  of  bodies  that  shall  rise  again,  His  body  is  a 
body  consubstantial  with  our  bodies"  (Hooker). 

a  reasonable  soul— Possessing  reason,  rational.     This  clause  of  the  Creed 


54  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

was  originally  directed  against  the  Apollinarian  heresy,  a  heresy  "held  loosely 
by  Arius,  but  afterwards  shaped  into  consistency  by  Apollinaris."  No  one 
who  has  not  studied  early  Church  history  can  have  any  conception  of  the 
struggles  the  Church  had  to  carry  on  with  all  manner  of  false  doctrine  con 
cerning  the  Person  of  Christ.  The  Apollinarian  heretics  admitted,  as  against 
the  Docetics,  that  our  Lord  had  a  "a  true  body,"  but  they  contended  that 
the  Divine  Nature  stood  Him  instead  of  a  soul.  They  failed  to  carry  out 
scripturally  and  symmetrically  the  whole  doctrine  of  the  Incarnation.  They 
could  not  accept  that  Christ  had  a  finite  intelligence,  and  human  affections, 
and  a  human  will.  They  accepted,  without  demur,  the  orthodox  doctrine  of 
the  Incarnation  as  far  as  Christ's  body  went,  but  they  could  not  accept  it  in 
the  region  of  the  mind.  It  was  to  correct  this  defective  teaching  on  a  funda 
mental  article  of  her  Christological  Creed  that  the  early  Church  inserted  the 
clause,  "a  reasonable  soul,"  —  a  clause  that  Scripture  enabled,  and  indeed 
compelled  her  to  insert.  For  every  page  of  the  gospel  narrative  testifies  to 
the  reality  of  our  Lord's  humanity  in  His  soul  as  well  as  in  His  body.  At 
one  time  He  rejoiced,  and  at  another  time  He  was  in  sorrow,  and  joy  and 
sorrow  are  affections  of  a  reasonable  soul.  He  had  a  human  will  distinct 
from  His  Divine  Will,  for  he  said,  "Not  my  will,  but  Thine  be  done." 
He  spoke  of  what  He  felt  when  He  said,  "My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful, 
even  unto  death."  And  teaching  us  how  to  die,  he  said,  "Father,  into  Thy 
hands  I  commend  my  spirit." 

by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost — "The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upon 
thee,  and  the  power  of  the  Highest  shall  overshadow  thee."  These  words 
of  the  announcing  angel  point  to  a  forthputting  of  divine  power  which  had 
never  been  exercised  before,  and  has  never  been  repeated  since.  For  Jesus 
Christ  was  born,  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of 
man,  but  of  the  will  and  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  "  The  same  Holy 
Ghost  who  at  the  first  creation  moved  on  the  face  of  the  waters,  when  dark 
ness  was  on  the  deep,  and  out  of  the  chaos  produced  light,  and  order,  and 
harmony,  and  beauty,  did  at  the  commencement  of  the  new  creation,  out  of 
the  corrupted  substance  of  the  Virgin,  form  a  human  body,  as  perfectly 
separated  from  all  corruption  by  the  divine  workmanship  as  the  symmetry, 
and  light,  and  beauty  of  the  material  world  were  separated  from  the  darkness, 
confusion,  and  shapelessness  of  the  desolate  abyss.  And  at  the  moment  when 
this  body  was  conceived  by  the  divine  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  power 
of  the  Highest  united  to  it  a  soul,  formed  also  in  perfect  purity  and  holiness. 
And  at  the  same  moment  too  were  both  body  and  soul  united  to  the  God 
head  in  the  Person  of  the  Son,  by  a  personal  union,  never  to  be  dissolved  " 
(Marcus  Dods  in  Christian  Instructor,  1830).  The  student  will  be  rewarded 
who  consults  the  able  and  elaborate  paper  referred  to.  He  will  also  find  it 
an  interesting  and  instructive  study  to  compare  Ps.  xl.  6  with  Heb.  x.  5, 
consulting  the  best  commentaries  on  both  passages. 

the  Virgin  Mary — The  Romish  Church  has  much  more  to  tell  her  people 
about  Mary  than  the  Scriptures  have  to  tell  their  readers.  But  the  Popish 
doctrines  concerning  the  immaculate  conception,  perpetual  virginity,  and 
assumption  of  Mary,  are  wholly  unscriptural  and  legendary.  There  is  not  an 
atom  of  authentic  history  about  her  till  we  come  to  the  narrative  in  the  opening 
of  the  Gospels.  We  know  nothing  of  Mary  till  Gabriel  discovers  her  to  us. 
And  important  and  interesting  as  her  history  subsequently  would  be,  it  is  yet 
told  us  in  the  most  incidental  way.  Though  it  is  to  be  avoided  and  blamed, 


BORN    OF   THE   VIRGIN   MARY.  55 

yet  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  Mary  has  been  too  much  made  of  in  some 
parts  of  the  Christian  Church.  Other  women  have  partaken  of  Christ,  have 
been  grafted  into  Him,  and  have  received  of  His  spiritual  fulness  ;  but  Mary, 
while  enjoying  this  grace  with  a  multitude  of  her  fellows,  had  this  transcen 
dent  honour,  that  her  Lord  and  Saviour  took  His  human  life  of  her,  was  bone 
of  her  bone,  and  flesh  of  her  flesh,  and  was  to  her  a  child  and  a  Son. 
"  Hers  was  the  face  that  unto  Christ  had  most  resemblance." 

The  unhappy  way  of  glorifying  Mary,  which  has  issued  in  such  a  portentous 
development  of  arbitrary  dogma  as  we  now  see  in  the  Romish  creed,  took 
its  rise  in  an  orthodox  interest,  and  with  a  right  intention.  The  Greek 
Fathers,  "  delighting  in  the  happy  compositions  of  their  language,"  called 
her  Theotocos,  the  mother  of  Him  who  is  God.  This  epithet  was  sanctioned 
by  several  of  the  greatest  and  most  orthodox  of  the  early  Councils,  and  it 
was  first  used  as  a  "  criterion  of  a  true  belief  in  the  Incarnation."  This  name 
was  not  at  all  intended  to  add  to  her  honour  ;  it  was  rather  used  as  another 
way  of  vindicating  the  true  divinity  of  Him  who  was  her  Son.  And  when 
scripturally  and  intelligibly  used,  the  epithet  is  unchallengeable.  But  as  the 
event  showed,  the  addition  of  this  Christological  designation  to  the  scriptural 
titles  of  Mary  was  speedily  productive  of  great  error  and  superstition.  The 
undoubted  fact  is,  that  this  orthodox  definition  of  the  early  Councils  was  a 
distinct,  though  unintentional,  step  toward  the  deification  of  the  Virgin  Mary. 

The  sum  of  Scripture  teaching  about  Mary  is  this  :  She  was  blessed  among 
women  in  being  chosen  to  be  the  mother  of  our  Lord.  And  as  His  mother 
her  name  is  to  be  held  in  love  and  reverence  by  all  who  believe  on  and 
worship  her  Son.  Remembering  her  service  to  Him,  all  generations  may 
well  call  her  blessed. 

born  of  her — "O  much  wished-for  birth,  without  which  we  ourselves 
might  well  wish  we  had  never  been  born  !  But  do  thou  thyself,  reader,  see 
that  thou  makest  sure  of  the  benefit  of  that  nativity  !  "  (Bengel). 

yet  without  sin.  "  A  eulogium  peculiar  to  Jesus  "  (Bengel).  "  He  had 
a  mother,  and  His  mother  conceived  Him ;  but  she  did  not  conceive  Him 
in  sin,  because  it  was  not  by  the  way  of  ordinary  generation  (Matt.  i.  20). 
He  came  not  under  (and  it  was  well  for  us  He  did  not)  the  law  of  ordinary 
generation  ;  hence  He  escaped  being  defiled  with  original  sin  "  (Goodwin). 

To  see  the  full  force  of  this,  it  must  be  recollected  that  till  Jesus  was  born 
all  the  children  born  of  women  had  been  born  in  sin.  To  be  a  man  hitherto 
was  to  be  a  sinner.  Till  His  advent  there  was  none  righteous,  no,  not  one. 
But  He  was  not  only  not  sinful,  but  He  was  "not  capable  of  sinning."  (See 
Marcus  Dods  on  Edward  Irving,  Christian  Instructor ;  1830.) 

USES. — i.  This  then  is  "  the  Redeemer  of  God's  elect."  We  do  not  yet 
know  from  our  Catechism  what  this  wonderful  Person  is  to  do.  We  are 
simply  told  up  to  this  point  who  and  what  He  is.  He  is  God  and  He  is 
man.  Man,  with  a  true  body  and  a  reasonable  soul ;  and  as  such  born 
without  sin.  Knowing  as  we  do  that  He  was  the  eternal  Son  of  God, 
equal  with  the  Father  in  power  and  glory,  and  that  He  took  a  body  and 
soul  prepared  for  Him  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  might  well  expect  some 
thing  surpassingly  great  to  come  of  a  union  of  Godhead  with  manhood. 
Had  we  not  already  known,  we  must  have  waited  with  the  deepest 
wonder  to  see  to  what  this  would  grow.  Let  us  follow  it  out  with 
understanding,  faith,  and  love. 


56  THE    SHORTER    CATECHISM    WITH    A    COMMENTARY. 

2.  Let  us  learn  from  this  also  that  man  is  not  necessarily  and  always  a 
sinner.     To  be  a  man  and  to  be  a  sinner  are  not  necessarily  and  always 
one  and  the  same  thing.     There  has  been  one  child  born,  yet  without 
sin.     There  was  once  a  man  on  the  earth  who  did  not  need  to  confess, 
"  I  was  shapen  in  iniquity."     Sin  did  not  reign  in  the  body  of  Jesus 
Christ.      His   garments  were  never  spotted  with   the   flesh.      He  was 
sanctified  from  His  mother's  womb,  and  He  kept  Himself,  and  the  evil 
one  touched  Him  not. 

3.  The  life  of  Christ  the  God-man  is,  or  may  be,  our  life.     As  Adam  was 
the  bitter  fountain  of  original  sin,  as  all  infirmity,  impurity,  languor,  and 
mortality  of  the  body,  and  all  unbelief,  ignorance,  malice,  hatred,  false 
hood,  and  selfishness  in  the  soul  has  its  rise  in  Adam  and  in  his  sin,  so  all 
our  graces,  faith,  love,  peace,  holiness,  hope, — all  have  their  wellspring  in 
Jesus  Christ.     He  is  the  Vine,  we  are  the  branches.     He  is  the  Head,  we 
are  the  members.     He  is  the  Son,  we  are  the  children.     Great  is  the 
mystery  of  godliness  ;  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  ;  and  then  in  the  flesh  made 
unto  us  wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Derive  and  explain  Docetism,    Apollinarianism,  and  Impeccability.     Point  out 
whence  the  clause,  yet  without  sin,  asserting  impeccability  of  our  Lord,  is  derived, 
and  giue  kindred  scriptures. 

2.  What  is  the  dogma  of  the  Immaculate  Conception?    What  do  you  know  of  its 
history  and  publication  ? 

3.  Point  out  the  leading  passages  in  John's  Epistles  directed  against  Docetism. 

4.  Show  how  the  Johannine  doctrine  of  Antichrist  bears  upon  the  doctrine  of  the 
Catechism. 

Q.  23.    What  offices  doth  Christ  execute  as  our  Redeemer  ? 

A.  Christ,  as  our  Redeemer,  executeth  the  offices  of  a  prophet, 
of  a  priest,  and  of  a  king,  both  in  his  estate  of  humiliation  and 
exaltation,  i 

i  Acts  iii.  21  :  Whom  the  heaven  must  receive  until  the  times  of  restitution  of 
all  things,  which  God  hath  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  all  his  holy  prophets  since  the 
world  began.  Ver.  22  :  For  Moses  truly  said  unto  the  fathers,  A  Prophet  shall 
the  Lord  your  God  raise  up  unto  you  of  your  brethren,  like  unto  me  ;  him  shall 
ye  hear  in  all  things  whatsoever  he  shall  say  unto  you.  Heb.  xii.  25  :  ...  him 
that  speaketh  from  heaven.  Compared  with  2  Cor.  xiii.  3 :  Since  ye  seek  a  proof 
of  Christ  speaking  in  me,  which  to  you-ward  is  not  weak,  but  is  mighty  in  you. 
Heb.  v.  5  :  So  also  Christ  glorified  not  himself  to  be  made  an  high  priest ;  but  he 
that  said  unto  him,  Thou  art  my  Son,  to-day  have  I  begotten  thee.  Ver.  6  :  As 
he  saith  also  in  another  place,  Thou  art  a  priest  for  ever,  after  the  order  of 
Melchisedec.  Ver.  7  :  Who  in  the  days  of  his  flesh  .  .  .  offered  up  prayers  and 
supplications,  with  strong  crying  and  tears.  Heb.  vii.  25  :  Wherefore  he  is  able 
also  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever 
liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them.  Ps.  ii.  6  :  Yet  have  I  set  my  King  upon  my 
holy  hill  of  Zion.  Isa.  ix.  6  :  For  unto  us  a  child  is  born,  unto  us  a  son  is  given  ; 
and  the  government  shall  be  upon  his  shoulder :  and  his  name  shall  be  called 
Wonderful,  Counsellor,  The  mighty  God,  The  everlasting  Father,  The  Prince  of 
Peace.  Ver.  7  :  Of  the  increase  of  his  government  and  peace  there  shall  be  no 
end,  upon  the  throne  of  David,  and  upon  his  kingdom,  to  order  it,  and  to  establish 
it  with  judgment  and  with  justice  from  henceforth  even  for  ever.  The  zeal  of  the 
Lord  of  hosts  will  perform  this.  Matt.  xxi.  5  :  Tell  ye  the  daughter  of  Sion, 


THE   OFFICES   OF  CHRIST.  57 

Behold,  thy  King  cometh  unto  thee.  Ps.  ii.  8  :  Ask  of  me,  and  I  shall  give  thee 
the  heathen  for  thine  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  thy 
possession.  Ver.  9  :  Thou  shalt  break  them  with  a  rod  of  iron  ;  thou  shall  dash 
them  in  pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel. 

The  offices— Our  English  word  office  is  derived  from  the  Latin  officiztm, 
and  both  in  derivation  and  use  it  means  any  special  trust,  duty,  or  charge  laid 
upon  or  taken  up  by  one  person  to  perform  for  another.  The  name  is  never 
applied  to  what  any  man  does  for  himself,  and  at  his  own  instance :  the 
name  of  an  office  is  applied  only  to  what  one  does  for  another.  It  is  a  scrip 
tural  term,  and  as  such  it  is  of  very  ancient  and  frequent  employment.  Thus 
we  read  of  Potiphar  as  an  officer  of  Pharaoh.  The  elders  and  judges  in  Israel 
also  bore  this  name.  We  read  also  of  the  priests'  office,  the  office  of  a  pastor, 
and  the  office  of  a  deacon.  "I  am  an  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,"  says  Paul, 
"  I  magnify  mine  office." 

The  name  is  not  applied  in  as  many  words  in  Scripture  to  our  Lord's  work, 
or  to  any  part  of  it,  but  it  is  very  familiar  to  us  from  theological  works,  and 
especially  from  our  Catechism.  The  classification  of  our  Lord's  work  as  the 
execution  of  the  offices  of  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King,  may  be  regarded  as 
somewhat  arbitrary.  It  may  fairly  be  said  that  these  three  categories  do  not 
exhaust  the  teaching  of  Scripture  concerning  all  that  our  Lord  has  done  and 
is  still  doing  for  us.  And  He  certainly  bears  other  official  names,  and  sus 
tains  relations  toward  us  that  cannot  all  be  included  under  those  three  offices. 
His  favourite  title  of  Shepherd,  for  instance,  implies  all  His  offices.  (See 
Goodwin,  v.  373.)  Still,  this  threefold  classification  has  long  obtained  in 
our  best  scriptural  theology,  and  it  serves  many  useful  purposes  to  the  student 
and  the  preacher.  This  classification  of  Christ's  work  has  come  to  us  from 
the  great  schoolmen,  and  it  has  secured  for  itself  a  sure  place  in  all  our  modern 
systems  of  evangelical  divinity. 

humiliation  and  exaltation.  "The  Jews  have  invented  a  double 
Messiah  ;  to  the  one  they  attribute  all  those  places  which  mention  His  low 
estate  and  sufferings  ;  and  to  the  other,  such  as  speak  of  His  power  and  glory. 
The  one  they  style  the  son  of  Joseph,  and  the  other  the  son  of  David  "  (Pearson). 

USE. — "How  God  is  to  preserve  holiness  and  forgive  sin,  I  am  at  my 
wits'  end  to  know ;  here  I  stand  nonplussed,  my  faculty  of  reason  serving 
me  not  a  jot.  .  .  .  Tell  me  how  this  is  to  come  to  pass,  and  you  shall 
be  my  prophet,  and  priest,  and  king.  For  verily  to  do  this  pertaineth  to 
Him  only  who  is  my  Prophet,  and  Priest,  and  King  "  (Edward  Irving). 


Q.  24.  How  doth  Christ  execute  the  office  oj  a  prophet '? 
A.  Christ  executeth  the  office  of  a  prophet,  in  revealing  to  us, 
by  his  word  and  Spirit,  the  will  of  God  for  our  salvation/ 

p  John  i.  18  :  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time ;  the  only-begotten  Son, 
which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  he  hath  declared  him.  i  Pet.  i.  10 :  Of  which 
salvation  the  prophets  have  enquired  and  searched  diligently,  who  prophesied  of 
the  grace  that  should  come  unto  you  :  Ver.  u  :  Searching  what,  or  what  manner 
of  time,  the  Spirit  of  Christ  which  was  in  them  did  signify,  when  it  testified 
beforehand  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  the  glory  that  should  follow.  Ver.  12  : 
Unto  whom  it  was  revealed,  that  not  unto  themselves,  but  unto  us,  they  did 


58  TIIK    SIIORTKR    CATKCIMSM    WITH    A    COMMENTARY. 

minister  the  things  which  are  now  reported  unto  you  by  them  that  have  preached 

tin:  j;os|,.-|  unto  you  with  the  Holy  (Jho.sl  scut  down  from  he.-ivcn.  John  xv.  i «;  : 
II.  n.i  loiih  I  call  you  not  servants;  for  i  nt  knowcth  not  what  his  lord 

doeth :  but  I  have  called  you  friends  ;  for  all  things  that  I  have  heard  of  my 
J'alh.-r  I  have  made  known  unto  you.  John  xx.  31  :  Hut  these  sin:  written,  that 
ye  might  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God  ;  and  that  believing  ye 
mi;:! it  have  life  through  his  name. 

the  office  of  a  prophet— The  title  prophet  fits  in  finely  to  the  definition 

and  description  of  an  office  ^iven  in  the  pn-crdiiiM  Answer.  For  as  an  oilier 
is  some  place  or  function  that  some  one  occupies  or  performs  for  another,  so 
a  prophet  is  one  who  speaks  for  another ;  conveying  and  interpreting  hi,  will. 
"The  office  of  the  prophet  in  the  fullest  sense  is  to  make  known  Another" 
(We  sicolt  on  John  i.  7).  ^Examples  of  the  claim  that  Christ  put  foith  lo  be 
a  |.i«)|ihet  will  lie  found  in  such  passages  as  John  vii.  16,  viii.  28,  xii.  /p, 
xiv.  10,  24. 

"  Christ  was,  by  way  of  eminence,  The  Prophet :  that  Prophet  that  s/nnilu 
come  into  the  world,  to  declarer  the  Divine  Will.  ll<-  published  anew  the  law 
of  nature,  which  men  had  corrupted  ;  and  the  very  knowledge  of  which,  to 
some  degree,  was  lost  among  them.  He  taught  mankind,  taught  us  auilmri- 
tatively,  to  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  f  resent  "world,  in  < 
pectation  of  the  future  judgment  of  God.  He  confirmed  the  truth  of  this 
moral  system  of  nature,  and  gave  us  additional  evidence  of  it — the  evid< -n< •<• 
of  testimony.  He  distinctly  revealed  the  manner  in  which  God  would  IK 
worshipped,  the  efficacy  of  repentance,  and  the  rewards  and  punishments  of 
a  future  life.  Thus  He  was  a  Prophet  in  a  sense  in  which  no  other  ever  was  " 
(I'.uiler).  "He  has  the  whole  prophetic  life  in  Himself.  The  path.,  ,  of  an 
I  :iiali,  the  melancholy  of  an  Hosea,  the  meekness  of  a  Jeremiah,  the  joy  in 
nature  of  an  Amos,  the  power  of  observation  of  the  proverb-  writer;,  UK  whole 
world  of  feeling  of  the  psalmists  have  all  been  transit ned  to  Him  "  (I  lausiath). 

by  revealing—"  Neither  knoweth  any  man  the  Father,  save  the  Son,  and 
he  to  whom  the  Son  will  reveal  Him."     "  The  only-begotten  Son,  whii  h  i ,  in 

the  bosom  ol  the  leather,  I  le  hath  declared    Him."     "  The  Revelation  of  Jesus 

Christ,  which  God  gave  unto  Him  to  show  unto  His  servants."  "  The  w;iy  of 
salvation  made  known  by  Christ  is  a  revelation  ;  it  is  not  a  relation  of  lome- 
thing  already  known  ;  it  is  not  theory,  invention,  or  speculation.  Nrith.-i  is 
the  way  of  salvation  a  discovery  of  human  reason,  like  .  lentific  difCO 

And  hence  the  absurdity  of  improvements  in  religion  "  (Stewart  of  <  'lomarly). 

_  by  MB  word  and  Spirit— "The  l;ibl«-  may  be  con  idered  as  a  consolida 
tion  of  partial  revelations.  There  were  dreams,  visions,  voices  from  heaven, 
Urim  and Thummim,  in  the  olden  times.  Thus,  in  these  'divers  mannei  , 
and  at  'sundry  times,'  were  revelations  made,  but  d.d  haih  in  these  la  .1 
days  spoken  to  us  by  His  Son.  .  .  .  Thus  the  Bible  is  adh.  <d  to  the 
nnd<  i  .lauding,  conscience,  affections,  to  the  whole  soul.  And  the  mllum.  ,; 
of  the  Spirit  is  co-extensive  with  the  word.  It  flows  into  and  embodiel 
itself  in  the  word.  Bless  God  for  the  promise  of  iln-  Spirit,  who  commands 
th<-  li'dit  to  shine  out  of  darkness,  by  the  authority,  omnipotence,  and 
"I  Mis  agency.  If  ye  love  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  }<•  are  ii"ne  ol  Hi." 
(Stewart). 

The  will  of  God  for  our  salvation.     "At  the  time  appointed  He  came 

forth   from  the  Father,  and    showed    Himself  in    this   external  woild,       lust    as 


THE   PROPHETICAL   OFFICE   OF   CHRIST.  59 

its  Creator,  then  as  its  Teacher,  the  Revealer  of  secrets,  the  Mediator,  the 
off-streaming  of  God's  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  His  Person.  Cloud 
nor  image,  emblem  nor  words,  are  interposed  between  the  Son  and  the  Eternal 
Father.  No  language  is  needed  between  the  Father  and  Him  who  is  the 
very  Word  of  the  Father  ;  no  knowledge  is  imparted  to  Him,  who  by  1 1  is 
very  nature  and  from  eternity  knows  the  Father,  and  all  that  the  Father 
knows  "  (Newman). 

"It  is  not  enough  to  say  of  the  doctrine  of  Jesus  that  it  shows  a  high 
religious  character  :  this  it  has  in  common  with  many  others ;  but  in  the 
doctrine  of  our  Lord  a  distinctly  soteriological  character  must  be  acknowledged. 
...  It  is  not  so  much  religious  truth  in  general,  as  in  an  especial  sense, 
the  truth  as  it  regards  salvation  which  has  been  brought  to  light  through 
Him"  (Oosterzee). 

USES. — i.  "  The  main  and  proper  end  of  one  of  the  offices  of  Jesus  Christ 
is  to  cure  the  defects  of  the  understanding.  ...  If  we  consider  all  the 
instructions,  reproofs,  and  doctrines  in  the  word,  what  are  they  but  so 
many  plasters  which  Christ  lays  to  our  heads  to  cure  our  diseased 
judgments,  and  by  healing  them  to  heal  all  the  other  faculties " 
(Goodwin). 

2.  "  The  great  subject  of  Christ's  instructions,  as  the  Prophet  and  Teacher 
of  His  Church,  was  the  will  of  God  for  our  salvation.     He  did  not  come 
to  teach  science  or  art ;   He  has   furnished  us  with  other  means  of 
obtaining  information  on  these  subjects  "  (Stewart). 

3.  "  What  is  the  first  instruction  hence  ?    That  none  need  be  discouraged 
at  their  natural  weakness  if  Christ  is  their  teacher  (Matt.  xi.   25) " 
(Flavel).     "And  thus  it  happens  that  men  of  the  lowest  class  and  the 
humblest  education  may  know  fully  the  ways  and  works  of  God :  far 
better  and  more  truly  than  the  most  sagacious  man  of  this  world  to 
whom  the  gospel  is  hid.      Religion  has  a  store  of  wonderful  secrets 
which  no  one  can  communicate  to  another,  and  which  are  most  pleasant 
and  delightful  to  know.     '  Call  upon  me,  and  I  will  answer  thee,  and 
show    thee  great  and  mighty   things   which  thou  knowest   not  of ' ' 
(Newman). 

QUESTIONS 

1.  Explain  Milton's  words : 

All  His  Father  In  Him  shone, 
and  glue  scriptural  parallels. 

2.  Explain  Butler's  words :  He  published  anew  the  law  of  nature,  and  give  scrip 
tural  Illustrations. 


Q.  25.  How  doth  Christ  execute  the  office  of  a  priest  1 
A.  Christ  executeth  the  office  of  a  priest,  in  his  once  offering 
up  of  himself  a  sacrifice  to  satisfy  divine  justice,8  and  reconcile 
us  to  God ;  *  and  in  making  continual  intercession  for  us.u 

•  Heb.  ix.  14 :  How  much  more  shall  the  blood  of  Christ,  who  through  the 
eternal  Spirit  offered  himself  without  spot  to  God,  purge  your  conscience  from 
dead  works,  to  serve  the  living  God  ?  Ver.  28  :  So  Christ  was  once  offered  to 
bear  the  sins  of  many. 


60  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

*  Heb.  ii.  17 :  .  .  .  a  merciful  and  faithful  high  priest  in  things  pertaining  to 
God  to  make  reconciliation  for  the  sins  of  the  people. 

u  Heb.  vii.  24:  But  this  man,  because  he  continueth  ever,  hath  an  unchangeable 
priesthood.  Ver.  25  :  Wherefore  he  is  able  also  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost 
that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them. 

the  office  of  a  priest— Priest,  Lat.  Presbyter^  an  elder,  an  old  man. 
"  Salvation  is  of  the  Jews  :  "  so  much  so,  that  the  very  vocabulary  of  our  sal 
vation  was  once  the  mother-tongue  of  God's  ancient  people.  Jewish  words, 
Jewish  ordinances,  Jewish  experiences,  mingle  with  all  our  New  Testament 
and  Christian  facts  and  doctrines.  In  the  doctrine  of  the  Christian  atonement 
we  still  think  and  speak  after  the  manner  of  the  Jews.  The  figure  of  a  throne, 
and  a  lawgiver  and  judge  sitting  upon  it,  with  an  atoning  priest  and  intercessor 
standing  beside  the  throne  sprinkling  the  throne  and  all  those  who  approach 
it  with  atoning  blood, — all  that  scenery  and  nomenclature  is  taken  from  the 
Mosaic  ritual.  And  so  divine  and  necessary  is  this  whole  conception,  that 
even  when  an  inspired  apostle  is  labouring  to  deliver  his  readers  from  their 
bondage  to  Jewish  traditions,  he  perpetuates  that  tradition  to  all  coming 
time.  He  is  compelled  to  write  as  a  Jew  even  when  he  is  divinely  working 
his  way  out  of  their  religious  fellowship.  There  is  no  book  in  the  Bible  more 
Jewish  in  its  language  and  modes  of  thought  than  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews, 
though  that  epistle  is  throughout  a  divinely  directed  argument  to  prove  that 
the  Jews'  day  is  past,  and  that  the  faith  and  worship  of  the  Jew  is  decayed 
and  waxed  old  and  ready  to  vanish  away. 

"  Sacrifice  being  of  divine  appointment,  the  calling  and  institution  of  the 
priesthood  was  so  likewise.  The  nature  of  the  priest's  office  implied  sin.  A 
priest  is  radically  and  essentially  a  mediator  or  intercessor,  and  it  is  only 
when  there  is  no  sin  that  there  is  no  need  of  an  intercessor.  It  was  not 
because  of  the  distance  of  the  Creator  from  the  creature  as  a  creature  that 
the  necessity  for  a  mediator  arose,  but  because  of  his  distance  as  a  guilty 
creature"  (Stewart). 

offering  up  of  himself— "And  since,  in  every  sacrifice,  four  things  are 
considered, — to  ivhom  it  is  offered,  by  whom  it  is  offered,  what  is  offered, 
and  for  whom  it  is  offered, — nor  is  sacrifice  due  to  any  save  to  God  alone, 
therefore  our  High  Priest  offered  Himself  to  God  for  us,  at  once  the  Priest 
and  the  Sacrifice  "  (Ambrose).  "  The  very  soul  of  the  doctrine  of  atone 
ment  is  its  substitutionary  nature :  that  taken  away,  the  whole  circle  of 
New  Testament  phraseology — not  only  in  the  English  translation,  but  in 
the  original — would  require  to  be  fundamentally  changed  :  the  language  of 
Scripture  is  adapted  to  a  vicarious  intervention,  and  to  no  other  "  (Pope). 

a  sacrifice  to  satisfy  divine  justice— Lat.  sacer,  sacred,  whence  sacerdos, 
a  priest;  sacrificium,  the  holy  rite  of  offering  a  victim.  "Sacrifice  was  the 
centre  of  worship  before  Christ.  It  was  that  part  of  the  Hebrew  service 
which  above  all  foreshadowed  His  love,  His  atonement  and  sacrifice,  and 
the  reconciliation  to  God  by  His  blood  whose  merits  it  pleaded  "  (Pusey). 

"  The  honour  of  God  does  not  permit  Him  to  forgive  sinners  out  of  His 
pity  ;  for  thereby  not  only  would  the  unrighteous  be  made  equal  to  the 
righteous,  and  all  order  in  His  kingdom  overthrown,  but  even  unrighteous 
ness  itself  would  be  put  upon  a  level  with  God,  if,  like  Him,  exempted  from 
the  authority  of  the  law  "  (Ritschl). 

' '  The  word  satisfaction  is  the  one  which  for  ages  has  been  generally  used 
to  designate  the  special  work  of  Christ  in  the  salvation  of  men.  Its  exact 


THE   PRIESTLY   OFFICE   OF   CHRIST.  6l 

etymological  equivalent  is  c  the  doing  enough.'  This  word  has  the  advantage 
of  being  precise,  comprehensible,  and  generally  accepted,  and  should  there 
fore  be  adhered  to"  (Hodge).  "  That  satisfaction  by  which  sins  are  blotted 
out,  so  that  we  are  no  longer  under  the  curse  and  the  sentence  of  death,  is 
to  be  found  nowhere  else  than  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ's  death  "  (Calvin). 

"  Man  in  himself  had  ever  lack'd  the  means 
Of  satisfaction.  .  .  .  For  God  more  bounty  show'd, 
Giving  Himself  to  make  man  capable 
Of  his  return  to  life,  than  had  the  terms 
Been  mere  and  unconditional  release. 
And  for  his  justice,  every  method  else 
Were  all  too  scant,  had  not  the  Son  of  God 
Humbled  Himself  to  put  on  mortal  flesh."— DANTE. 

"  Die  he  or  justice  must :  unless  for  him 
Some  other  able,  and  as  willing,  pay 
The  rigid  satisfaction,  death  for  death. 
Say,  Heavenly  Powers,  where  shall  we  find  such  love, 
Which  of  ye  shall  be  mortal  to  redeem 
Man's  mortal  crime,  and  just  th'  unjust  to  save, 
Dwells  in  all  heaven  charity  so  dear? "—  MILTON. 

"  What  Adam  did  amiss, 
Turned  to  our  endless  bliss  J 
O  happy  sin,  which  to  atone, 
Drew  Filial  God  to  leave  His  throne."— KEN. 

This  last  is  but  a  versification  of  Augustine's  bold  words,  Beata  culpa. 

and  reconcile  us  to  God— Reconcile,  to  restore  to  friendship  those  who 
have  become  estranged  or  hostile.  Now  this  is  the  work  of  Christ  as  a 
priest.  He  removes  the  offence,  and  makes  peace  between  God  and  the 
sinner,  and  hence  Paul  calls  the  gospel  "  the  word  of  reconciliation."  "In 
vain  it  is  objected  that  the  Scripture  saith  our  Saviour  reconciled  man  to 
God,  but  nowhere  teacheth  that  He  reconciled  God  to  man  ;  for  in  the 
language  of  the  Scripture  to  reconcile  a  man  to  God  is  in  our  vulgar 
language  to  reconcile  God  to  man,  that  is,  to  cause  Him  who  before  was  angry 
and  offended  with  him,  to  be  gracious  and  propitious  to  him  "  (Pearson). 
"The  satisfaction  for  our  sins  was  accomplished  on  the  cross,  and  it  depended 
upon  the  eternal  pleasure  of  God,  who  would  be  pacified  in  this  way " 
(Calvin  on  Rom.  iv.  25).  "There  was  need  of  reconciling  us  to  God,  be 
cause  by  sin  we  were  set  at  enmity  with  God  (Isa.  lix.  2).  God  had  a  legal 
enmity  against  us,  such  as  a  just  judge  hath  against  a  malefactor,  whose 
person  he  may  love  notwithstanding  (Matt.  v.  25).  And  we  have  naturally  a 
real  enmity  against  God,  inconsistent  with  love  to  Him  (Col.  i.  21)  "  (Boston). 

"  The  office  of  a  priest  differed  from  all  other  ecclesiastical  offices,  in  that 
he  was  to  deal  with  God  on  behalf  of  man.  Others,  from  the  inspired 
prophet  or  apostle  to  the  evangelist,  bishop,  elder,  or  deacon,  were  ap 
pointed  by  God  to  deal  with  man.  The  priest  likewise  held  his  office  by 
the  command  of  God  ;  but  his  office  was  God-ward,  while  that  of  all  the 
others  was  man  -  ward "  (Stewart).  (See  Owen,  Vindicice  Evangelicce, 
chap,  xxix.) 

making  continual  intercession  for  us.  To  intercede  is  to  come  in 
between  two  parties  at  variance,  with  a  view  to  their  reconciliation.  And 
the  Scriptures  supply  us  with  abundant  consolation  concerning  the  inter- 
cession^of  Christ  in  our  behalf.  "Who  is  he  that  condemneth?"  is  the 
apostle's  challenge;  "It  is  Christ  that  died,  yea  rather,  that  is  risen 


62  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM    WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

again,  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who  also  maketh  intercession 
for  us."  "  Nor  must  we  look  upon  this  as  a  servile  or  precarious,  but  rather 
as  an  efficacious  and  glorious  intercession,  as  of  Him  to  whom  all  power  is 
given  both  in  heaven  and  earth  "  (Pearson).  This  intercession  is  perpetual, 
unconditional,  and  all-prevailing.  It  is  not  carried  on  by  words  and  plead 
ings  ;  Christ's  simple  presence  in  our  nature  at  God's  right  hand  secures 
for  us  the  fruit  of  His  death.  Hence  the  orthodox  schoolmen  said  His 
intercession  was  real,  not  verbal. 

There  is  a  relation  or  correspondence  distinctly  traceable  in  Scripture 
between  the  various  parts  of  Christ's  work  for  us,  and  the  results  of  that 
work  in  us.  It  is  a  frequent  scriptural  distinction  to  say  that  as  on  earth 
He  gave  Himself  for  our  sins,  so  in  heaven  He  makes  intercession  for  our 
persons.  He  died  for  our  sins,  He  intercedes  for  our  souls.  The  apostle 
puts  it  very  clearly  in  Romans  :  "  We  are  justified  by  His  blood  ;  but  being 
reconciled  we  are  saved  by  His  life."  Our  past  sins  were  the  cause  of 
His  death ;  our  sanctification  and  full  salvation  are  the  end  and  fruits  of 
His  intercession.  "  Christ's  intercession  in  heaven,  is  a  kind  and  powerful 
remembrance  of  His  people,  and  of  all  their  concerns,  managed  with  state 
and  majesty  :  not  as  a  suppliant  at  the  footstool,  but  as  a  crowned  prince 
on  the  throne,  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father  "  (Traill). 

USES. — i.  "  The  essential  idea  of  sin  is  not,  that  it  is  merely  a  debt  or  an 
injury,  but  that  it  is  a  violation  of  God's  law,  and  therefore  the  leading 
character  or  aspect  in  which  God  ought  to  be  contemplated  when  we 
regard  Him  as  dealing  with  it,  is  not  that  of  a  creditor,  or  an  injured 
party,  who  may  remit  the  debt,  or  forgive  the  injury,  as  He  chooses,  but 
that  of  a  lawgiver  and  a  judge  who  has  promulgated  a  just  and  righteous 
law,  prohibiting  sin  under  pain  of  death,  and  who  is  bound,  by  a 
regard  to  His  own  perfections,  and  the  interests  of  holiness  throughout 
the  universe,  to  take  care  that  His  own  character  be  fully  vindicated,  that 
the  honour  of  His  law  be  maintained,  and  that  His  moral  government 
be  firmly  established  ;  and  who,  therefore,  cannot  pardon  sin,  unless,  in 
some  way  or  other,  full  and  adequate  provision  be  made  for  securing  all 
those  objects  "  (Cunningham). 

2.  "  It  is  Christ  considered  as  clothed  with  His  garments  of  blood,  and  the 
qualifications  of  a  mediator  and  reconciler ;  it  is  this  that  makes  Him  so 
desirable  by  sinners,  and  a  fit  object  for  their  faith,  which  looks  out  for 
justification,  to  prey  and  seize  upon.  Paul  preached  Christ  above  all,  so 
Christ  as  crucified  above  all  in  Christ "  (Goodwin). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Derive  and  explain  priest,  pontiff,  presbyter,  pastor,  minister. 

2.  Quote  a  definition  and  description  of  a  priest's   office  from  the  New  Testament, 
and  explain  Ritscht's  words :  His  priesthood  has   more  of  dissimilarity  than  of 
resemblance  to  the  type. 

3.  Explain  Meyer's  words :  His  obedientia  passiua  is  active ;  it  is  the  highest  point 
of  his  activity. 

4.  Explain  Banyan's  words :  Christ  suffered   as  a  common,  though  a  particular 
person,  and  as  a  sinner,  though  always  completely  righteous. 

5.  Christ  died  not  for  propositions  only  to  make  them  true,  but  for  persons. 
What  controversy  does  this  statement  bear  upon  ? 

6.  Make  clear  the  scholastic  distinctions  between  an  intercession  real  and  verbal. 
Did  Christ  ever  intercede  for  us  verbally  ? 


THE    KINGLY    OFFICE    OF    CHRIST.  63 

Q.  26.  How  doth  Christ  execute  the  office  of  a  king? 

A.  Christ  executeth  the  office  of  a  king,  in  subduing  us  to 
himself/  in  ruling w  and  defending  us,x  and  in  restraining  and 
conquering  all  his  and  our  enemies. y 

v  Acts  xv.  14  :  Simeon  hath  declared  how  God  at  the  first  did  visit  the  Gentiles, 
to  take  out  of  them  a  people  for  his  name.  Ver.  16  :  I  will  return,  and  will  build 
again  the  tabernacle  of  David,  which  is  fallen  down  ;  and  I  will  build  again  the 
ruins  thereof,  and  I  will  set  it  up. 

*  Isa.  xxxiii.  22  :  For  the  Lord  is  our  judge,  the  Lord  is  our  lawgiver,  the  Lord 
is  our  king  ;  he  will  save  us. 

1  Isa.  xxxii.  i  :  Behold,  a  king  shall  reign  in  righteousness,  and  princes  shall 
rule  in  judgment.  Ver.  2  :  And  a  man  shall  be  as  an  hiding-place  from  the  wind, 
and  a  covert  from  the  tempest ;  as  rivers  of  water  in  a  dry  place  ;  as  the  shadow 
of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  land. 

y  i  Cor.  xv.  25  :  For  he  must  reign,  till  he  hath  put  all  enemies  under  his  feet. 
Ps.  ex.  throughout. 

the  office  of  a  king — See  the  amplification  of  this  Answer  in  Larger 
Catechism,  Answer  45. 

"  The  king-becoming  graces 
Are  justice,  verity,  temperance,  stableness, 
Bounty,  perseverance,  mercy,  lowliness, 
Devotion,  patience,  courage,  fortitude." — SHAKESPEARE. 

subduing  us  to  himself— We  are  born  in  a  state  of  rebellion  against  God 
and  Christ.  We  all  come  into  the  world  alienated  from  our  Maker  and 
Redeemer.  And  accordingly,  one  of  the  leading  offices  of  Christ  is  to  subdue 
us.  And  hence  it  is  that  every  conversion  is  represented  as  a  conquest :  to  be 
more  and  more  brought  under  law  to  Christ  is  the  very  life  of  grace  and  the 
salvation  of  the  soul.  Christ's  sceptre  is  not  so  much  the  symbol  of  His  power 
as  of  our  salvation. 

"  Earthly  kingdoms  are  founded  not  in  justice,  but  in  injustice.  They  are 
created  by  the  sword,  by  robbery,  cruelty,  perjury,  craft,  fraud.  There  never 
was  a  kingdom  except  Christ's,  which  was  not  conceived  and  born,  nurtured 
and  educated  in  sin.  There  never  was  a  state  but  it  was  committed  to  acts 
and  maxims  which  it  is  its  crime  to  maintain,  and  its  ruin  to  abandon.  What 
monarchy  is  there  but  began  in  invasion  and  usurpation  ?  What  revolution 
has  been  effected  without  self-will,  violence,  and  hypocrisy  ?  What  popular 
government  but  is  blown  about  by  every  wind  as  if  it  had  no  conscience 
and  no  responsibilities?  What  dominion  of  the  few  but  is  selfish  and 
unscrupulous?  What  is  military  strength  without  the  passion  for  war?  But 
Christ's  kingdom  is  of  another  sort.  This  is  the  indelible  distinction  between 
it  and  all  other  kingdoms,  that  they  spring  from  evil,  and  depend  on  evil,  but 
that  the  life  of  the  Church  lies  in  what  would  pull  down  all  the  empires  of  the 
world— in  patience,  in  simplicity,  in  innocence,  in  concession,  in  passiveness, 
iii  resignation  "  (Newman). 

in  ruling  and  defending  us — Having  subdued  us,  Christ  rules  us.  We 
are  not  compelled,  but  sweetly  constrained  to  take  the  law  of  our  life  in  every 
thing  from  His  Word  and  Spirit.  We  are  proud  to  confess  that  we  are  not 
our  own.  Things  we  would  continually  do  were  we  our  own,  we  do  not  do 
because  we  are  Christ's.  "Your  bodies  and  your  souls  are  His,"  says  the 


64  THE    SHORTER    CATECHISM    WITH    A    COMMENTARY. 

apostle.     And  every  breach  of  the  covenant  in  misruling  the  body  or  the 
soul  is  an  act  of  rebellion  against  our  heavenly  King. 

But  it  is  the  office  of  a  king  to  defend  as  well  as  rule  his  subjects.  It  is  the 
experience  of  this  that  teaches  His  subjects  to  sing  :  "  The  Lord  is  my  rock, 
and  my  fortress,  and  my  deliverer ;  my  God,  my  strength,  in  whom  I  will 
trust ;  my  buckler,  and  the  horn  of  my  salvation,  and  my  high  tower."  And 
our  Lord  is  set  before  us  in  Scripture  as  a  priest  upon  his  throne ;  that  is  to 
say,  He  is  an  Intercessor  whose  power  is  nothing  short  of  the  power  of  a 
sovereign.  And  all  power  in  heaven  and  on  earth  is  in  His  hand,  that  by 
means  of  it  he  should  subdue,  rule,  and  defend  His  people. 

restraining  and  conquering  all  his  and  our  enemies.  The  enemies  of 
Christ  and  the  enemies  of  the  subjects  of  Christ  are  of  two  kinds,  temporal 
enemies  and  spiritual.  Under  temporal  enemies  may  be  classed  all 
opposers  and  persecutors  of  the  cause  and  people  of  Christ,  with  all 
scoffers  and  blasphemers  of  His  name.  On  the  other  hand,  His  and 
our  spiritual  foes,  according  to  the  common  classification  of  Scripture,  are 
sin,  Satan,  and  death.  On  the  restraining  and  conquering  of  sin,  Pearson 
uses  these  weighty  words  :  "  Christ  then  as  King  destroyeth  the  power  of  sin 
in  all  those  that  belong  to  His  kingdom,  annihilating  the  guilt  thereof  by  the 
virtue  of  His  death,  destroying  the  dominion  thereof  by  His  actual  grace,  and 
taking  away  the  spot  thereof  by  grace  habitual.  But  in  the  reprobate  and 
damned  souls,  the  spot  of  sin  remaineth  in  its  perfect  dye,  the  dominion  of 
sin  continued!  in  its  absolute  power,  the  guilt  of  sin  abideth  in  a  perpetual 
obligation  to  eternal  pains ;  but  in  all  this,  in  subjection  to  His  throne,  the 
glory  of  which  consisteth  as  well  in  punishing  rebellion  as  in  rewarding 
loyalty."  On  the  restraining  and  conquering  of  Satan  see  Heb.  ii.  14 ;  I  John 
iii.  8  ;  also  the  history  of  the  Temptation  in  the  Gospels,  and  the  book  of 
Revelation  throughout.  "The  last  enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed  is  death 
.  .  .  death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory.  .  .  .  And  death  and  hell  shall  be 
cast  into  the  lake  of  fire.  .  .  .  For  He  must  reign  till  He  hath  put  all 
enemies  under  His  feet." 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Explain  Luke  i.  31-33  as  our  Lord's  contemporaries  understood  it;  also  as  the 
Holy  Ghost  meant  it. 

2.  Dr.  Hodge,  discussing  the  kingly  office  of  Christ,  says :  His  visible  kingdom  is 
spiritual,  catholic,  temporary,  and  absolute.    Explain  these  attributes,  and  illustrate 
from  Scripture. 

3.  Derive  and  explain  the  saying:  There  are  two  kings  'and  two  kingdoms  in 
Scotland. 

4.  Commit  to  memory  Shakespeare's  King-becoming  graces ;  also  Kelly's  hymn : 

The  head  that  once  was  crowned  with  thorns. 


Q.  27.    Wherein  did  Christ's  humiliation  consist? 
A.  Christ's  humiliation  consisted  in  his  being  born,  and  that 
in  a  low  condition,2  made  under  the  law,a  undergoing  the  miseries 

1  Luke  ii.  7  :  And  she  brought  forth  her  first-born  son,  and  wrapped  him  in 
swaddling  clothes,  and  laid  him  in  a  manger ;  because  there  was  no  room  for  them 
in  the  inn. 

a  Gal.  iv.  4  :  .  .  .  made  under  the  law. 


CHRIST'S  HUMILIATION.  65 

of  this  life,b  the  wrath  of  God,c  and  the  cursed  death  of  the  cross ;d 
in  being  buried,6  and  continuing  under  the  power  of  death  for  a 


b  Heb.  xii.  2  :  .  .  .  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame.  Ver.  3  :  Consider 
him  that  endured  such  contradiction  of  sinners  against  himself.  Isa.  liii.  2  :  For 
he  shall  grow  up  before  him  as  a  tender  plant,  and  as  a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground  : 
he  hath  no  form  nor  comeliness  ;  and  when  we  shall  see  him,  there  is  no  beauty 
that  we  should  desire  him.  Ver.  3  :  He  is  despised  and  rejected  of  men  ;  a  man 
of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief ;  and  we  hid  as  it  were  our  faces  from  him  : 
he  was  despised,  and  we  esteemed  him  not. 

c  Luke  xxii.  44 :  And,  being  in  an  agony,  he  prayed  more  earnestly :  and  his 
sweat  was  as  it  were  great  drops  of  blood  falling  down  to  the  ground.  Matt. 
xxvii.  46  :  And  about  the  ninth  hour  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Eli, 
Eli,  lama  sabachthani  ?  that  is  to  say,  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken 
me? 

d  Phil.  ii.  8  :  .  .  .  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross. 

e  i  Cor.  xv.  4  :  He  was  buried. 

f  Acts  ii.  24  :  Whom  God  hath  raised  up,  having  loosed  the  pains  of  death. 
Ver.  26 :  My  flesh  shall  rest  in  hope.  Ver.  27 :  Because  thou  wilt  not  leave  my 
soul  in  hell,  neither  wilt  thou  suffer  thine  Holy  One  to  see  corruption.  Ver.  31  : 
His  soul  was  not  left  in  hell,  neither  his  flesh  did  see  corruption. 

Christ's  humiliation — Lat.  humilis,  near  the  ground.  From  same  root 
also  human  and  homage.  This  is  a  Scripture  term  as  applied  to  our  Lord 
(Acts  viii.  33;  Phil.  ii.  8).  And  the  successive  steps  of  His  humiliation  are 
given  in  this  Answer. 

his  being  born — The  Psalmist  says  that  even  to  "behold  the  things  that 
are  in  heaven  and  on  earth"  is  to  "humble  Himself."  What  then  must  it  be 
to  come  to  earth  and  pass  through  all  we  are  in  this  Answer  told  He  did  pass 
through  !  The  lowness  of  His  condition,  and  all  that  fitly  followed  that, 
even  to  His  death  and  burial, — all  this  strikes  our  imagination,  and  awakens 
our  sympathy  more  ;  but  to  stoop  from  heaven  and  its  glory  and  blessedness 
to  earth  and  its  misery,  that  was  humiliation  it  hath  not  entered  into  the 
heart  of  man  to  conceive.  For  the  eternal  Son  of  God  to  be  "born  of  a 
woman,"  was  a  humiliation  that  might  lead  to  any  depth,  as  it  did  lead  to 
depths  that  pass  our  imagination. 

a  low  condition — "She  brought  forth  her  first-born  Son,  and  wrapped 
Him  in  swaddling  clothes,  and  laid  Him  in  a  manger,  because  there  was  no 
room  for  them  in  the  inn."  "  How  was  it  with  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living 
God  ?  Where  was  He  born  ?  In  a  stable.  I  suppose  not  many  men  suffer 
an  indignity  so  great :  born,  not  in  quiet  and  comfort,  but  amid  the  brute  cattle. 
And  what  was  His  first  cradle,  if  I  may  so  call  it?  A  manger.  Such  were 
the  beginnings  of  His  earthly  life ;  nor  did  His  condition  mend  as  life  went 
on.  He  says  on  one  occasion  :  '  Foxes  have  holes,  and  birds  of  the  air  have 
nests,  but  the  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay  His  head.'  '  Ye  know  the 
grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  though  He  was  rich,  yet  for  your  sakes 
He  became  poor,  that  ye  through  His  poverty  might  be  rich ' "  (Newman). 

made  under  the  law — "  Christ  was  born  under  the  moral  law  as  a  creature 
and  a  Son  of  Adam,  and  under  the  ceremonial  law  as  a  Son  of  Abraham  " 
(Goodwin). 

E 


66  THE    SHORTER    CATECHISM    WITH    A    COMMENTARY. 

"The  law  to  which  Christ  subjected  Himself  was — (i)  The  law  given  to 
Adam  as  a  covenant  of  works,  that  is,  prescribing  perfect  obedience  as  a 
condition  of  life ;  (2)  the  Mosaic  law  which  bound  the  Jewish  people  ;  (3) 
the  moral  law  as  a  rule  of  duty.  And  the  subjection  to  the  law  was  voluntary 
and  vicarious  "  (Hodge). 

undergoing  the  miseries  of  this  life — "For  sad  occurrences  and  events 
befalling  Him  from  the  dispensations  of  providence,  and  the  enmity  of  the 
creatures,  there  was  more  befell  Him  than  ever  befell  any  man.  He  was  vir 
dolorum,  a  'man  of  sorrows,'  which  did  all  wear  and  waste  Him,  as  griefs 
use  to  do  us,  so  that  in  the  judgment  of  those  that  saw  Him,  He  looked 
nearer  fifty  years  old  than  thirty,  as  that  known  speech  may  seem  to  impart. 
Furthermore,  we  never  read  that  He  once  laughed  in  His  lifetime.  .  .  .  Nor 
was  there,  or  ever  could  there  be  supposed,  any  man  so  put  to  it  as  He  : 
wisdom  to  converse  with  folly,  perfect  holiness  with  sin  and  impurity,  truth 
with  errors  and  mistakes.  In  converses  of  near  relations,  contrarieties,  and 
antipathies  of  dispositions,  how  burdensome  are  they  !  He  could  have  had 
much  better  and  more  suitable  company  in  heaven ;  yet  Christ  with  an 
unwearied  patience  bore  all  this  "  (Goodwin). 

the  wrath  of  God  —  The  word  wrath  is  the  familiar  scriptural  term  to 
express  any  manifestation  of  the  displeasure  of  God  against  sin.  Christ, 
although  in  Himself  perfectly  holy,  bore  our  sins  (2  Cor.  v.  21  ;  Isa.  liii.  12). 
"The  wrath  of  God  did  operate  on  His  soul,  filling  it  with  troubles,  sore 
amazement,  heaviness,  and  exceeding  sorrow,  and  casting  Him  into  an  agony, 
even  to  His  sweating  great  drops  of  blood,  and  at  length  bringing  over  it  a 
total  eclipse  of  all  comfort,  and  as  it  were  melting  it  within  Him  (John 
xii.  27  ;  Mark  xiv.  33,  34 ;  Luke  xxii.  44 ;  Matt,  xxvii.  46  ;  Ps.  xxii.  14). 
This  was  a  spiritual  death,  such  as  a  holy  soul  was  capable  of.  Now  the 
wrath  of  God  could  justly  fall  upon  Christ,  a  person  perfectly  innocent,  inasmuch 
as  He  stood  surety  for  sinners  (Heb.  vii.  22,  with  Prov.  vi.  I,  2 ;  2  Cor.  v.  21)" 
(Horsley). 

the  cursed  death  of  the  cross — Curse  and  cross  are  at  bottom  the  same  word 
and  mean  the  same  thing.  To  curse  originally  meant  to  execrate  by  the  sign  of 
the  cross.  "  The  curse  denounced  in  the  law,  on  those  hanged  on  a  tree,  was  a 
ceremonial  curse,  not  hindering  the  salvation  of  penitents  (Luke  xxiii.  33,  43). 
But  the  curse  that  lay  on  Christ  in  His  humiliation  was  a  real  and  substantial  one, 
whereof  the  tree  of  His  cross  was  but  the  badge  and  sign  (Gal.  iii.  13)"  (Boston). 

"  The  love  of  Christ  led  Him  to  unite  Himself  to  us,  and  He  completed  the 
union  by  His  death"  (Calvin).  (See  Goodwin's  Christ  the  Mediator,  v.  4,  5.) 
But  let  the  truth  taught  in  the  somewhat  technical  language  of  theology  never 
be  forgotten  :  The  Vital  Union  was  severed  for  a  time  by  death,  but  the 
Personal  Union  never.  (See  under  "for  ever,"  Answer  21.) 

continuing  under  the  power  of  death  for  a  time.  This  clause  in  the 
Catechism  is  intended  to  cover  all  that  is  taught  in  the  Apostles'  Creed  by  the 
words  "He  descended  into  Hell."  For  the  true  explication  of  that  unfor 
tunate  clause  see  any  good  Protestant  commentator  on  the  Creed. 

Note. — The  clause  in  Phil.  ii.  8,  He  humbled,  or  better,  emptied  Himself, 
is  a  crucial  passage  in  christological  doctrine.  There  is  a  great  body  of 
commentators  and  divines  who  hold  that  the  eternal  Son  literally  and  actually 
" emptied  Himself"  of  His  divine  power  and  glory  during  His  period  of 
humiliation,  and  only  recovered  and  resumed  after  His  ascension  what  He  had 


CHRIST'S  HUMILIATION  AND  EXALTATION.  67 

laid  aside.  But  opposed  to  them  there  is  another  and  better  body  of  theo 
logians,  who  earnestly  and  anxiously  contend  against  all  such  impossible 
explanations,  and  who  assert  that  the  apostle  must  be  read  metaphorically,  and 
not  literally,  or  rather  must  be  read  as  referring  to  our  Lord's  condition  and 
experiences  in  His  human  nature,  and  not  in  His  Divine  Nature,  when  he 
says  that  the  unchangeable  and  eternal  Son  ''emptied  Himself."  For  to  read 
that  text  literally,  and  of  the  Divinity,  say  they,  would  be  the  contradiction 
and  overthrow  of  the  very  first  principles  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Divine  Nature 
and  the  Divine  Sonship.  The  Divine  Nature,  they  contend,  is  eternal  and 
unchangeable  in  each  of  the  Three  Divine  Persons,  and,  therefore,  in  the 
Second  of  the  Three  ;  and  not  even  the  Incarnation,  not  even  the  cross  or 
the  grave,  can  in  any  way  suspend  or  impair  the  Son's  possession  and  exercise 
of  the  whole  Godhead  power  and  glory.  And  they  teach,  accordingly,  that 
the  "emptiness,"  of  which  Paul  undoubtedly  speaks,  stood  only,  and  could 
only  stand,  in  the  humanity  of  our  Lord,  and  is  to  be  understood  and  affirmed 
of  the  humanity  alone.  "  Remaining  what  He  was,  He  became  what  He  was 
not."  When  the  eternal  Son  of  God  became  man,  He  extended  rather  than 
contracted  Himself,  He  added  to  rather  than  took  from  Himself,  He  added 
humanity  and  its  humiliating  attributes  to  Himself  rather  than  emptied  Him 
self  of  divinity  and  its  glorious  attributes.  And  consequently,  His  human 
"  emptiness,"  which  was  no  metaphor,  but  an  awful  reality,  was  continually 
supported  on  earth,  and  is  still  eternally  supplied  in  heaven  out  of  His  own 
divine  and  everlasting  and  unchangeable  Fulness.  (See  Hooker,  V.  liv.  4.) 

USES. — I.  "Homer  expresses  the  Greek  idea  of  greatness  in  these  words  : 
' Ever  to  lead  the  van,  and  to  surpass  others.'  Quite  otherwise  was  it  with 
the  Lord  Jesus.  His  path  was  not  upwards,  but  downwards.  He  was 
great,  not  by  ascending,  but  by  descending ;  hence  his  was  not  a  brilliant, 
but  a  silent  greatness.  The  aim  of  his  every  action  was  to  draw  near  to 
the  mean  and  the  despised,  to  seek  the  lost,  to  minister  to  others, 
instead  of  being  ministered  unto"  (Ullman). 

2.  Read  Newman's  sermon,  Chris? s  Privations  a  Meditation  for  Chris 
tians.  Also  Stewart  of  Cromarty's  Tree  of  Promise,  The  Priesthood,  ix. 
Larger  Catechism,  Questions  46-50.  Commit  and  practise  Paraphrase  lii. 


Q.  28.    Wherein  consisteth  Chris? s  exaltation? 

A.  Christ's  exaltation  consisteth  in  his  rising  again  from  the 
dead  on  the  third  day,s  in  ascending  up  into  heaven,h  in  sitting 
at  the  right  hand  of  God  the  Father,1  and  in  coming  to  judge  the 
world  at  the  last  day.J 

s  i  Cor.  xv.  4  :  He  rose  again  the  third  day  according  to  the  scriptures. 

h  Mark  xvi.  19  :  He  was  received  up  into  heaven,  and  sat  on  the  right  hand  of 
God. 

1  Eph.  i.  20 :  Which  he  wrought  in  Christ,  when  he  raised  him  from  the  dead, 
and  set  him  at  his  own  right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places. 

J  Acts  i.  ii :  This  same  Jesus,  which  is  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven,  shall  so 
come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  him  go  into  heaven.  Acts  xvii.  31  :  Because 
he  hath  appointed  a  day,  in  the  which  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness  by 
that  man  whom  he  hath  ordained ;  whereof  he  hath  given  assurance  unto  all  men, 
in  that  he  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead. 


68  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

Christ's  exaltation— See  Larger  Catechism,  Questions  51-56. 

his  rising  again  from  the  dead  on  the  third  day — The  conception  of  the 
resurrection  of  Christ  is  almost  confined,  in  modern  times,  to  the  fact  that 
"after  three  days  he  rose  again."  In  St.  Paul  it  has  a  much  wider  import ; 
it  is  a  new  life  of  Christians  as  well  as  Christ — a  resurrection  of  the  believer 
at  the  same  time  with  his  Lord.  Altogether,  there  are  four  ways  in  which 
the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  spoken  of  in  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  the  ethical 
or  spiritual  meanings  often  blending  with  the  literal  facts.  First,  the  resur 
rection  is  spoken  of  as  an  outward  fact,  of  which  there  were  many  witnesses. 
Secondly,  as  an  idea  or  doctrine,  forming  a  part  also,  or  aspect,  of  the  inner 
life  of  the  gospel.  Thirdly,  as  the  figure  or  condition,  almost  the  cause,  of  the 
resurrection  of  believers,  which  is  identified  with  the  resurrection  of  Christ 
as  the  Christian  himself  is  with  Christ  Himself.  Fourthly,  as  the  figure,  or 
condition,  or  principle  of  spiritual  resurrection.  .  .  .  These  four  series,  as 
points  of  view  in  which  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  spoken  of,  easily  pass 
into  one  another  (condensed  from  Jowett  on  Gal.  i.  i). 

"  The  death  of  Christ  is  the  principal  agency  toward  our  reconciliation  j 
but  His  resurrection  is  the  real  assurance  that  we  are  truly  reconciled  to 
God  "  (Lange). 

ascending  up  into  heaven — It  was  in  His  human  nature  that  Christ 
ascended,  not  in  His  Divine  Nature,  because  it  was  always  in  heaven. 
"  Heaven,  that  place  of  all  places  in  the  universe  of  things  in  situation  most 
eminent,  in  quality  most  holy,  in  dignity  most  excellent,  in  glory  most 
illustrious,  the  innermost  sanctuary  of  God's  temple  above"  (Barrow).  "The 
heaven  into  which  Christ  ascended  is  not  the  atmospheric  or  stellar  heaven  ; 
the  term  is  an  emblematical  expression  for  the  invisible  residence  of  God,  the 
seat  of  perfect  order,  whence  emanates  every  manifestation  of  righteousness 
upon  the  earth,  every  victorious  struggle  of  good  against  evil.  The  visible 
heavens,  the  regularity  of  the  motions  of  the  stars,  the  lifelike  and  pure 
lustres  of  their  fires,  this  whole  great  spectacle  has  always  been  to  the  con 
sciousness  of  man  the  invisible  representation  of  the  divine  order  "  (Godet). 

"  From  God  the  Father  He  proceeds, 
To  God  the  Father  back  He  speeds  ; 
Proceeds  as  far  as  very  hell, 
Speeds  back  to  light  ineffable."— AMBROSE. 

sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God  the  Father— "A  similitude  borrowed 
from  princes,  who  have  their  assessors,  to  whom  they  commit  the  office  of 
ruling  and  issuing  commands.  Thus  Christ,  in  whom  the  Father  is  pleased 
to  be  exalted,  and  by  whose  hand  He  is  pleased  to  reign,  is  said  to  have  been 
received  up,  and  seated  on  His  right  hand,  as  if  it  had  been  said  that  He  is 
installed  in  the  government  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  formally  admitted  to 
possession  of  the  administration  committed  to  Him,  and  not  only  admitted  for 
once,  but  to  continue  until  he  descend  to  judgment.  .  .  .  All  that  the 
apostles  intend,  when  they  so  often  mention  His  seat  at  the  Father's  right 
hand,  is  to  teach  that  everything  is  placed  at  His  disposal "  (Calvin). 

"  Oh,  methought,  Christ  !  Christ !  There  was  nothing  but  Christ  that 
was  before  mine  eyes.  I  was  not  now  for  looking  upon  this  and  that  benefit 
apart,  as  of  His  blood,  burial,  resurrection,  but  considered  Him  as  a  whole 
Christ,  as  He  in  whom  all  these,  and  all  other  His  virtues,  relations,  offices, 
and  operations  met  together,  and  that  as  He  sat  on  the  right  hand  of  God  in 
heaven  "  (Bunyan). 


CHRIST'S  EXALTATION.  69 

and  in  coming  to  judge  the  world  at  the  last  day.  God  in  His  pure 
Godhead  is  not  to  be  our  judge,  but  Christ  in  His  Godhead  and  manhood. 
We  are  to  be  judged  by  man.  And  man's  feelings,  affections,  passions ;  His 
pity,  compassion,  tenderness,  will  all  operate  in  the  judgment,  as  well  as  His 
wrath,  scorn,  loathing,  and  contempt.  Our  judgment  will  be  as  near,  and 
direct,  and  personal  as  if  we  were  arraigned  before  a  judge  in  an  earthly 
court,  and  as  searching  and  immediate  as  if  God  Omniscient  and  All- 
righteous  sat  on  our  case.  The  man  Christ  Jesus  will  judge  every  one  of  us 
(Acts  xvii.  31).  "Between  His  ascension  and  His  coming  in  glory  no 
event  intervenes  equal  in  importance  to  each  of  these  two  events  ;  therefore 
these  two  are  joined  together.  Naturally,  therefore,  the  apostles,  before  the 
giving  of  the  Apocalypse,  set  before  them  the  day  of  Christ  as  very  near. 
And  it  accords  with  the  majesty  of  Christ,  that  during  the  whole  period 
between  His  Ascension  and  His  Advent  He  should,  without  intermission, 
be  expected"  (Bengel).  Read  Jonathan  Edwards'  great  sermon,  The 
Final  Judgment.  On  Paul's  words,  "God  shall  judge  the  secrets  of  men 
by  Jesus  Christ,  according  to  my  gospel"  Bengel  remarks:  "The  gospel 
is  the  whole  preaching  as  to  Christ,  and  Christ  will  be  the  judge.  .  .  .  All 
the  articles  of  evangelical  doctrine,  and  the  article  concerning  the  'final 
judgment,  greatly  illustrate  one  another;  and  moreover  this  very  article,  even 
in  respect  of  believers,  is  altogether  evangelical  (Acts  x.  42  ;  I  Pet.  iv.  5)." 

USES. — i.  "  To  none  of  the  great  truths  relating  to  the  two  natures  of  our 
Lord  is  it  more  necessary  to  adhere  firmly  in  the  present  age  than  to  that 
of  His  resurrection.  A  hearty  belief  in  the  literal  and  local  ascent  of  our 
Lord's  humanity  is  in  itself  a  belief  in  the  whole  mystery  of  the  union  of 
Godhead  and  manhood  "  (Ellicott). 

2.  "  Human  nature  is  at  this  moment  the  highest  of  created  natures,  and 
more  intimately  united  to  the  Godhead  than  any  other ;  and  where  our 
Head  is,  there  shall  all  His  members  in  due  time  be.     Whoever,  then, 
thou  art  that  turnest  thine  eye  on  this  one  page,  our  message  to  thee  is, 
that  in  a  few  short  years  thou  must  occupy  that  place  to  which  angels 
may  look  up  with  admiration,  or  that  on  which  devils  may  look  down, 
with  the  conviction  that  they  have  been  less  guilty  than  thee.     Higher 
than  heaven  is  the  fate  of  him  whom  the  Saviour  of  the  world  became  man 
to  redeem  ;  and  lower  than  hell  must  be  the  fate  of  him  who  has  even  at 
such  a  price  refused  to  be  redeemed  "  (Dods  in  Christian  Instructor,  1830). 

3.  "  It  is  consolatory  to  think  that  judgment  is  vested  in  Him  who  has 
already  destined  us  to  share  with  Him  in  the  honour  of  judgment ;  so 
far  is  it  from  being  true  that  He  will  ascend  the  judgment-seat  for  our 
condemnation.     How  could  a   most   merciful   prince   destroy  his   own 
people  ?  how  could  the  head  disperse  its  own  members  ?  how  could  the 
advocate  condemn  his  own  clients  ?  ...  It  certainly  gives  no  small  security 
that  we  shall  be  sisted  at  no  other  tribunal  than  that  of  our  Redeemer, 
from  whom  salvation  is  to  be  expected  ;  and  that  He  who  now  in  the 
gospel    promises    eternal   blessedness,  will    then    as  judge    ratify   His 
promise.     The  end  for  which  the  Father  has  honoured   the   Son,   by 
committing  all  judgment  to  Him,  was  to  pacify  the  consciences  of  His 
people  when  alarmed  at  the  thought  of  judgment"  (Calvin). 

4.  "Coming  to  judge  the  world."     ''The  thing  is  true,  but  the   time 
appointed  is  long"  (Dan.  x.  i). 


70  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM    WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

QUESTION. 

Explain  Bengel's  remnrh,  that  the  doctrine  of  the  final  judgment  is  "  altogether 
evangelical." 

Q.  29.  How  are  we  made  partakers  of  the  redemption  purchased 
by  Christ  1 

A.  We  are  made  partakers  of  the  redemption  purchased  by 
Christ,  by  the  effectual  application  of  it  to  usk  by  his  Holy  Spirit.1 

k  John  i.  12  :  But  as  many  as  received  him,  to  them  gave  he  power  to  become 
the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  his  name. 

1  Tit.  iii.  5  :  According  to  his  mercy  he  saved  us,  by  the  washing  of  regeneration, 
and  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Ver.  6  :  Which  he  shed  on  us  abundantly 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour. 

The  student  will  be  rewarded  who  keeps  his  eye  on  the  structure  of  the 
Catechism.  Note  that  as  Question  20  introduced  Christ  and  His  redeeming 
work,  so  the  Question  now  before  us  in  like  manner  introduces  the  Holy  Spirit. 
The  logical  method  of  this  document  is  one  of  its  most  notable  features. 

The  redemption  purchased  by  Christ — A  redemption,  from  the  very 
etymology  of  the  word,  is  a  purchase.  And  hence  He  who  purchased  in 
this  case  is  called  the  Redeemer.  See  Answer  20.  "The  Son  of  man 
came  to  give  His  life  a  ransom  for  many."  Now  a  ransom  is  a  price  paid  to 
redeem  those  who  are  held  in  bondage  or  captivity.  And  Scripture  every 
where  teaches  that  the  fallen  state  of  man  is  a  state  of  guilt  and  bondage, 
from  which  Christ  has  redeemed  His  people  by  laying  down  His  life  as  a 
ransom  for  them.  "Ye  are  bought  with  a  price,"  saith  Paul;  and  Peter 
says,  "  We  are  not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things  as  silver  and  gold,  but 
with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ."  "  The  redemption  purchased  "  is  thus  an 
entirely  scriptural  expression.  (See  Calvin's  Institutes,  II.  xvii.  and  Morison 
on  Rom.  iii.  24.) 

"  Two  things  are  principally  to  be  considered  in  the  respect  that  forgiveness 
hath  to  the  blood  of  Christ — (i)  The  way  of  its  procurement;  (2)  The  way  of 
its  administration  by  Him.  The  first  is  deep,  mysterious,  dreadful.  It  was 
by  His  blood,  the  blood  of  His  cross,  the  travail  of  His  soul,  His  undergoing 
wrath  and  curse.  This  also  adds  to  the  mysterious  depth  of  forgiveness,  and 
makes  its  discovery  a  great  matter.  The  soul  that  looks  after  it  in  earnest 
must  consider  what  it  cost.  ...  To  see  the  mystery  of  the  love  of  the  Father, 
working  in  the  blood  of  the  Mediator,  to  consider  by  faith  the  great  transac 
tion  of  divine  wisdom,  justice,  and  mercy  therein — how  few  attain  unto  it ! 
To  come  unto  God  by  Christ  for  forgiveness,  and  to  behold  the  law  issuing 
all  its  threats  and  curses  in  His  blood,  and  losing  its  sting,  putting  an  end 
to  its  obligation  unto  punishment,  in  the  cross  ;  to  see  all  sins  gathered  up  in 
the  hands  of  God's  justice,  and  made  to  meet  in  the  Mediator,  and  eternal 
love  springing  forth  triumphantly  from  His  blood,  flourishing  into  pardon, 
grace,  mercy,  forgiveness — this  the  heart  of  a  sinner  can  be  enlarged  into  only 
by  the  Spirit  of  God  "  (Owen). 

"  Look  what  salvation  thou  dost  design,  saith  Christ,  that  I  will  purchase, 
and  notwithstanding  my  purchase  thou  shalt  give  it  all  freely.  Grace  shall 
not  be  robbed  one  whit  by  me,  but  advanced ;  the  ransom  of  it  shall  not  be 


CHRIST'S  REDEMPTION  APPLIED.  71 

one  whit  impaired  by  me ;  no,  the  giving  of  me,  and  that  I  die  by  grace 
(Heb.  ii. ),  shall  magnify  grace  so  much  the  more,  and  make  it  double  grace. 
So  that  now  the  grace  that  was  in  God  hath  a  Saviour  for  us  fitted  to  His  own 
heart."  (See  the  whole  dialogue  between  God  and  Christ  in  Goodwin's 
twenty-first  Sermon  on  Eph.  ii.) 

effectual  application — "There  are  three  sorts  of  works  whereby  our 
salvation  is  completed  and  accomplished.  I.  Immanent  in  God  toward  us,  as 
His  eternal  love  set  and  passed  upon  us,  out  of  which  He  chose  us,  and 
designed  this  and  all  blessings  to  us.  2.  Transient,  in  Christ  done  for  us ; 
in  all  He  did  or  suffered  representing  of  us,  and  in  our  stead.  3.  Applied- ' 
tory,  wrought  in  us  and  upon  us,  in  the  endowing  us  with  all  those  blessings 
by  His  Spirit,  as  calling,  justification,  sanctification,  glorification"  (Goodwin). 

by  his  Holy  Spirit.  "  The  Father  provides  the  Saviour,  and  the  purchase 
is  made  of  Him  ;  the  Son  is  the  purchaser  and  the  price,  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
is  the  great  blessing  or  inheritance  purchased,  as  is  intimated,  Gal.  iii.  13,  14. 
This  inheritance  was  the  grand  legacy  which  Christ  left  His  disciples  and  the 
Church  in  His  last  will  and  testament,  John  xiv.,  xv.,  xvi.  This  is  the  sum 
of  the  blessings  of  eternal  life  which  shall  be  in  heaven."  (See  Jonathan 
Edwards's  Religious  Affections,  Part  iii.  section  I — a  book  of  extraordinary 
ability  and  value.) 

..."  Christ  made  His  will  by  His  death  (Heb.  ix.),  but  the  Spirit  is  His 
administrator.  Christ's  blood  and  purchase  gave  us,  by  His  redeeming  us, 
jus  ad  rem  ;  but  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  applying  it,  jus  in  re ;  He  gives  us 
possession,  livery,  and  seisin  "  (Goodwin). 

USE. — "  We  might  as  well  strike  from  the  Bible  the  name  and  doctrine  of 
God,  as  the  name  and  office  of  the  Spirit.  In  the  New  Testament  alone 
He  is  mentioned  not  far  from  three  hundred  times.  .  .  .  The  work  of 
the  Spirit  in  applying  the  redemption  of  Christ  is  represented  to  be  as 
essential  as  the  redemption  itself.  It  is  therefore  indispensable  that  we 
should  know  what  the  Bible  teaches  concerning  the  Holy  Ghost,  both  as 
to  His  nature  and  office"  (Hodge). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Describe  the  new  departure  that  the  doctrine  oj  the  Catechism  takes  from  this 
point. 

2.  What  Is  the  word  that  in  the  Larger  Catechism  corresponds  to  purchased  In  the 
Shorter?     Derive  both  words,  and  point  out  the  passages  where  the  latter  word  is 
used  in  this  connection  in  the  New  Testament. 

3.  Explain  the  saying :  Mercy  bated  Christ  nothing. 

4.  How  doth  God  forgive  sin  according  to  the  riches  of  His  grace,  when  He 
receiveth  a  price  for  it  ?    Doth  a  man  freely  forgive  when  he  is  paid  for  it  9   For 
full  answer,  see  Goodwin's  Sermon  on  Eph.  i.  7. 

5.  Why  HIS  Holy  Spirit  ?  and  why  His  HOLY  Spirit  ? 

6.  How  do  you  explain  John  vii.  39  and  Acts  xix.  2? 


72  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

Q.  30.  How  doth  the  Spirit  apply  to  us  the  redemption  purchased 
by  Christ! 

A.  The  Spirit  applieth  to  us  the  redemption  purchased  by 
Christ,  by  working  faith  in  us,m  and  thereby  uniting  us  to  Christ 
in  our  effectual  calling.11 

m  Eph.  i.  13  :  In  whom  ye  also  trusted,  after  that  ye  heard  the  word  of  truth, 
the  gospel  of  your  salvation  :  in  whom  also,  after  that  ye  believed,  ye  were  sealed 
with  that  holy  Spirit  of  promise,  Ver.  14 :  Which  is  the  earnest  of  our  inheritance, 
until  the  redemption  of  the  purchased  possession,  unto  the  praise  of  his  glory. 
John  vi.  37  :  All  that  the  Father  giveth  me  shall  come  to  me  :  and  him  that 
cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out.  Ver.  39  :  And  this  is  the  Father's  will 
which  hath  sent  me,  that  of  all  which  he  hath  given  me  I  should  lose  nothing,  but 
should  raise  it  up  again  at  the  last  day.  Eph.  ii.  8  :  For  by  grace  are  ye  saved 
through  faith  ;  and  that  not  of  yourselves  :  it  is  the  gift  of  God. 

n  Eph.  iii.  17 :  That  Christ  may  dwell  in  your  hearts  by  faith ;  that  ye,  being 
rooted  and  grounded  in  love,  etc.  i  Cor.  i.  9  :  God  is  faithful,  by  whom  ye  were 
called  unto  the  fellowship  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

The  Spirit  applieth — The  word  literally  means  to  join  or  fold  together, 
also  to  lay  on,  as  of  an  emollient  on  a  diseased  or  injured  part.  In  the 
scriptural  and  doctrinal  use  of  the  word  in  the  text,  it  describes  that  blessed 
work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  by  which  the  fruits  of  Christ's  redemption  are  laid 
upon  the  soul,  and  effectually  and  indissolubly  made  ours.  In  Hooker's  great 
sermon  on  Justification  the  following  passage  occurs,  and  it  is  here  quoted  as 
stating  in  noblest  words  the  doctrine  both  of  Christ's  purchase  of  redemption 
and  the  manner  of  its  application  to  us  : — "  Christ  hath  merited  righteousness 
for  as  many  as  are  found  in  Him.  In  Him  God  findeth  us,  if  we  be  faithful  ; 
for  by  faith  we  are  incorporated  into  Him.  Then,  although  in  ourselves  we 
be  altogether  sinful  and  unrighteous,  yet  even  the  man  which  in  himself  is 
impure,  full  of  iniquity,  full  of  sin  ;  him  being  found  in  Christ  through  faith, 
and  having  his  sin  in  hatred  through  repentance,  him  God  beholdeth  with  a 
gracious  eye,  putteth  away  his  sin  by  not  imputing  it,  taketh  quite  away  the 
punishment  due  thereunto  by  pardoning  it ;  and  accepteth  him  in  Jesus  Christ  as 
perfectly  righteous,  as  if  he  had  fulfilled  all  that  is  commanded  him  in  the  law  ; 
shall  I  say  more  perfectly  righteous  than  if  he  himself  had  fulfilled  the  whole 
law?  I  must  take  heed  what  I  say;  but  the  apostle  saith,  '  God  made  Him  to 
be  sin  for  us.  who  knew  no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of 
God  in  Him.'  Such  we  are  in  the  sight  of  God  the  Father,  as  is  the  very  Son 
of  God  Himself.  Let  it  be  counted  folly,  or  frenzy,  or  fury,  or  whatsoever. 
It  is  our  wisdom  and  our  comfort ;  we  care  for  no  other  knowledge  in  the 
world  but  this,  that  man  hath  sinned,  and  God  hath  suffered ;  that  God  hath 
made  Himself  the  sin  of  men,  and  that  men  are  made  the  righteousness  of  God." 

redemption — The  act  of  redeeming  or  buying  back,  effecting  a  ransom. 
Thus  we  speak  of  the  redemption  of  prisoners  taken  in  war,  and  of  the 
redemption  of  an  estate  that  had  been  mortgaged.  In  the  scriptural  and  theo 
logical  language  before  us,  it  means  the  deliverance  of  sinners  from  the  bondage 
of  sin  and  from  the  sentence  of  condemnation.  (See  Answers  21,  29.) 

purchased  by  Christ— Christ  effected  the  redemption,  paid  the  ransom, 
and  hence  He  is  called  the  Redeemer.  His  work  is  called  a  purchase  because 


EFFECTUAL  CALLING.  73 

He  did  and  paid  all  that  God's  justice  demanded  for  our  pardon  and  release. 
"Christ  hath  merited  to  make  us  just;  but  as  a  medicine  that  is  made  for 
health  doth  not  heal  by  being  made,  but  by  being  applied  ;  so,  by  the  merits 
of  Christ,  there  can  be  no  justification  without  the  application  of  His  merits  " 
(Hooker). 

by  working  faith — 'For  faith  see  Question  86.  See  also,  for  a  full  exhibition 
of  the  Spirit's  work  in  our  salvation,  Goodwin,  vol.  vi. 

uniting  us  to  Christ — To  unite  is  to  make  two  or  more  into  one.  Now 
the  text  teaches  that  the  subjects  of  effectual  calling  are  made  one  with 
Christ.  This  union  is  set  forth  under  many  beautiful  and  instructive  figures 
in  Holy  Scripture. 

USES. — i.  "  Let  us  apply  ourselves  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  let  us  glorify  Him 
in  our  hearts,  let  us  dart  forth  beams  of  special  and  peculiar  love  to  Him, 
let  us  converse  with  Him,  and  fear  to  grieve  Him." 

2.  "  Is  He  the  author  of  conversion  ?  Then  lament  and  bewail  the  hard 
ness  of  thy  heart,  which,  though  it  hath  so  often  had  good  motions  put 
into  it  by  the  Spirit,  yet  hath  not  followed  them,  but  given  a  deaf  ear  to 
them  "  (Goodwin). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Explain   the  wording  in  the  parallel  clause  in  the  Larger  Catechism :  The  elect 
are  spiritually  and  mystically,  but  really  and  inseparably,  joined  to  Christ  as 
their  head  and  husband. 

2.  Giue  the  leading  passages  in  Scripture  where  Christ  is  called  The  Redeemer ; 
also  the  more  familiar  figures  under  which  the  union  that  subsists  between  Him  and 
His  people  is  set  forth. 

Q.  3 1.    What  is  effectual  calling? 

A.  Effectual  calling  is  the  work  of  God's  Spirit,0  whereby,  con 
vincing  us  of  our  sin  and  misery,p  enlightening  our  minds  in  the 
knowledge  of  Christ,  i  and  renewing  our  wills,1"  he  doth  persuade 
and  enable  us  to  embrace  Jesus  Christ,  freely  offered  to  us  in  the 
gospel.8 

0  2  Tim.  i.  9  :  Who  hath  saved  us,  and  called  us  with  an  holy  calling,  not 
according  to  our  works,  but  according  to  his  own  purpose  and  grace,  which  was 
given  us  in  Christ  Jesus  before  the  world  began.     2  Thess.  ii.  13  :  .  .  .  salvation 
through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit,  and  belief  of  the  truth.     Ver.  14  :  Whereunto 
he  called  you  by  our  gospel,  to  the  obtaining  of  the  glory  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

P  Acts  ii.  37  :  Now  when  they  heard  this,  they  were  pricked  in  their  heart,  and 
said  unto  Peter,  and  to  the  rest  of  the  apostles,  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ? 

1  Acts  xxvi.  18  :  To  open  their  eyes,  and  to  turn  them  from  darkness  to  light. 

r  Ezek.  xxxvi.  26  :  A  new  heart  also  will  I  give  you,  and  a  new  spirit  will  I  put 
within  you ;  and  I  will  take  away  the  stony  heart  out  of  your  flesh,  and  I  will  give 
you  an  heart  of  flesh.  Ver.  27 :  And  I  will  put  my  Spirit  within  you,  and  cause 
you  to  walk  in  my  statutes,  and  ye  shall  keep  my  judgments,  and  do  them. 

8  John  vi.  44 :  No  man  can  come  to  me,  except  the  Father,  which  hath  sent  me, 
draxv  him.  Ver.  45  :  It  is  written  in  the  prophets,  And  they  shall  be  all  taught  of 
God.  Every  man  therefore  that  hath  heard,  and  hath  learned  of  the  Father, 
cometh  unto  me.  Phil.  ii.  13  :  For  it  is  God  which  worketh  in  you,  both  to  will 
and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure. 


74  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

Effectual  calling — Effectrix  vocatio,  Aug.  Cruden  gives  a  table  setting 
forth  fourteen  different  uses  of  this  word  in  Scripture,  beginning  with  the 
first  and  simplest  use,  "And  God  called  the  light  Day"  (Gen.  i.  5).  And 
the  highest  sense  of  this  familiar  word  is  seen  in  such  scriptures  as  these, 
"God  hath  saved  us,  and  called -us,  with  an  holy  calling"  "Give  diligence 
to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure."  Dr.  Hodge,  in  his  exhaustive 
and  excellent  chapter  on  "Vocation,"  says  :  "The  work  of  the  Spirit  is  in 
the  scriptures  called  VOCATION.  It  is  one  of  the  many  excellences  of  the 
Reformed  theology  that  it  retains,  as  far  as  possible,  scriptural  terms 
for  scriptural  doctrines.  .  .  .  The  words  of  Scripture  are  the  words  of 
the  Spirit,  and  it  is  becoming  and  important  that  they  should  be  retained." 
Effectual — Producing,  or  having  adequate  power  or  force  to  produce,  an 
intended  effect.  As  frequently  in  Paul,  ' '  a  great  door  and  effectual  is  opened 
to  me  ; "  "  by  the  effectual  working  of  His  power,"  etc.  "  Calling,  in  the  sense 
in  which  Paul  uses  it,  cannot  fail,  or  remain  ineffectual.  In  truth,  calling 
and  election  are,  with  him,  one  and  the  same  thing,  with  the  one  exception 
of  the  different  epochs,  which  man  necessarily  assigns  to  the  two  acts  in 
question"  (Reuss). 

the  work  of  God's  Spirit — In  the  Larger  Catechism  it  is  called  "the  work 
of  God's  almighty  power  and  grace ; "  and  in  the  Confession  the  work  of 
God's  "word  and  Spirit."  A.  work  like  sanctification,  not  an  act  like  jus 
tification  and  adoption.  And  the  stages  of  the  work  are  given  in  varied 
detail  in  the  text  and  in  the  two  documents  named.  "  Spirit,  as  the  word 
is  used  to  signify  the  Third  Person  in  the  Trinity,  is  the  substantive,  from 
which  is  formed  the  adjective  spiritual  in  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Thus 
Christians  are  called  spiritual  persons  because  they  are  born  of  the  Spirit, 
and  because  of  the  indwelling  and  holy  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in 
them  "  (Jonathan  Edwards). 

convincing  us  of  our  sin  and  misery — The  first  step  the  Spirit  takes  in  our 
effectual  calling  is  to  convince  us  of  sin.  To  convict,  in  ordinary  speech,  and 
especially  in  legal  usage,  is  to  prove  an  accused  person  guilty  of  the  charge 
that  has  been  laid  against  him.  To  convince^  again,  though  originally  and 
really  the  same  word  as  to  convict,  has  by  long  usage  been  restricted  to 
intellectual  and  moral  processes.  To  convince  is  to  conquer  the  mind  ;  it  is 
to  subdue  any  one  by  reason  and  argument ;  it  is  to  force  truth  home  on 
the  understanding  and  heart.  The  phrase  before  us,  conviction  of  sin,  is  an 
expression  often  made  use  of  by  experimental  writers  to  set  forth  that  conquest 
of  divine  grace  when  the  soul  of  a  sinner  is  so  overcome  that  he  feels  and 
confesses  himself  corrupt,  guilty,  and  lost.  And  that  divine  work — for  a 
divine  work  it  always  is — is  here  set  in  the  very  forefront  of  the  process  of 
"effectual  calling." 

The  Holy  Ghost,  so  to  speak,  frames  an  indictment,  and  carries  a 
conviction  in  their  consciences  against  sinners.  He  is  always  and  above  all 
the  Spirit  of  God,  the  Spirit  of  truth  and  of  holiness,  and  if  He  is  to 
enter  our  hearts  effectually  as  the  Spirit  of  grace  and  salvation,  He  must 
begin  His  work  in  truth.  And  the  first  stage  of  His  work  is  finished  when 
our  mouth  is  shut  under  a  sense  of  guilt  and  shame.  But  while  conviction 
of  sin  is  properly  put  in  the  foreground  of  our  effectual  calling,  yet  we  are  not 
to  understand  by  that  that  the  Spirit's  convicting  work  is  past  and  finished 
when  conversion  is  first  effected.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  only  the  truly  con 
verted  and  spiritually  enlightened  man  who  sees  or  can  see  what  Scripture 


THE    RENEWAL   OF   THE   WILL.  75 

calls  the  slnfulness  of  sin.  It  is  not  under  the  heavy  and  prostrating  hand 
of  the  Spirit  of  bondage,  but  rather  under  the  healing  and  sanctifying  hand 
of  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  that  we  become  spiritually  and  adequately  con 
vinced  of  sin.  Let  the  student  consult  Hare's  Mission  of  the  Comforter, 
Note  L. 

sin  and  misery— For  misery,  see  Answers  19,  20,  and  27.  All  men  feel 
the  widespread  suffering  that  is  in  the  world,  but  this  doleful  word  misery 
is  reserved  in  religious  language  to  describe  the  experience  of  persons  under 
the  Spirit's  hand  in  effectual  calling.  See  the  Psalms  throughout,  and 
such  books  of  experimental  and  evangelical  religion  as  Grace  Abounding. 

enlightening  our  minds  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ — "Savingly  en 
lightening  their  minds"  (Larger  Catechism);  "enlightening  their  minds 
savingly  and  spiritually  to  understand  the  things  of  God "  (Confession). 
Darkness  and  light  are  terms  which  continually  occur  to  describe  a  state  of 
nature  and  a  state  of  grace  in  the  Scriptures.  Heathenism  is  a  life  of  dark 
ness  ;  Judaism,  if  not  darkness,  has  its  eyes  under  a  dense  veil ;  while  an 
unregenerate  state  in  Jew  and  Gentile  is  slavery  in  a  kingdom  of  darkness. 
Believers  alone  are  children  of  the  light  and  of  the  day.  They  are  light  in 
the  Lord.  Nay,  they  are  the  light  of  the  world. 

In  this  part  of  His  work  the  Holy  Ghost  turns  the  sinner's  attention,  for 
a  time  at  least,  off  himself  and  toward  Christ  and  His  salvation.  And  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  now  attained  just  corresponds  to  the  soul's  new  know 
ledge  of  sin ;  and  these  true  branches  of  knowledge  grow  mutually  and 
correspondingly  to  the  end  of  life.  Let  a  sinner  be  once  truly  convinced  of 
sin,  and  let  his  eyes  be  also  enlightened  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  and 
just  in  the  measure  of  his  conviction  of  sin  and  misery,  the  revelation  of 
Christ  will  prove  inexhaustible  in  its  power,  beauty,  attractiveness,  and  grace. 
Yea,  doubtless,  such  a  man  will  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency 
of  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Lord. 

"  Thou  celestial  Light 

Shine  inward,  and  the  mind  through  all  her  powers 
Irradiate,  there  plant  eyes,  all  mist  from  thence 
Purge  and  disperse,  that  I  may  see." — Paradise  Lost,  iii.  51-54 

renewing  our  wills — "renewing  and  powerfully  determining  their  wills " 
(Larger  Catechism);  "renewing  their  wills,  and  by  His  almighty  power 
determining  them  to  that  which  is  good  "  (Confession). 

There  is  a  vast  literature,  ancient  and  modern,  philosophical  and  theological, 
connected  with  the  will,  and  the  study  is  one  of  the  profoundest  on  which 
the  mind  of  man  can  enter.  This  deep  and  difficult  subject  cannot  be  entered 
on  here.  The  religious  and  experimental  outcome  of  the  scriptural  and  con 
fessional  doctrine  of  the  will  is  familiar  to  many  through  a  well-known  work 
of  Scottish  divinity — Boston's  Fourfold  State.  The  fourfold  state,  that  is, 
of  the  human  will.  Its  state  in  Adam  before  the  Fall ;  its  state  in  his 
descendants  before  regeneration  ;  the  state  of  the  will  in  the  regenerate ;  and 
lastly,  its  state  in  the  glorified.  This  is  an  old  division  ;  both  the  School 
men  and  the  Fathers  recognized  it,  and  made  use  of  it.  (See  Cunningham, 
vol.  i.) 

All  the  parts  of  man's  nature  have  suffered  each  their  own  peculiar  injury 
by  the  catastrophe  of  the  Fall,  but  it  is  those  parts  that  have  more 


76  THE    SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

immediately  to  do  with  God  and  His  revealed  will  that  have  suffered  most. 
And  no  part  has  suffered  such  a  shock  and  hurt  as  the  will.  It  is  now  by 
nature  and  in  every  unregenerate  man  turned  away  from  God,  and  in  bondage 
to  sin  and  evil.  It  is  not  that  man  would  do  good,  would  return  to  God 
if  he  could  ;  it  is  not  that  he  cannot,  he  will  not.  "  Ye  will  not  come  unto 
me  that  ye  might  have  life."  There  was  no  hand  holding  them  back,  no  cord 
binding  them  but  the  bands  of  their  evil  will.  This  is  what  is  meant  when 
learned  divines  treat  of  the  bondage  and  inability  of  the  will. 

The  work  of  the  Spirit  in  renewing  the  will  and  setting  it  free  is  secret, 
spiritual,  and  mysterious.  "The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and  thou 
nearest  the  sound  thereof,  but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh,  and  whither 
it  goeth  ;  so  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit."  At  the  same  time  the 
work  of  the  Spirit  is  in  a  man,  and  though  much  of  that  work  is  necessarily 
mysterious  and  inscrutable,  yet  its  results  are  such  as  by  attention  and  care 
may  be  noted  and  known,  as  thus  : — "  First,"  says  one  whose  name  occurs 
often  in  these  notes,  "  I  felt  my  soul,  and  all  the  powers  of  it,  as  in 
an  instant,  to  be  clean  altered  and  changed  in  the  disposition  of  them. 
Secondly,  I  found  from  the  same  time  the  works  of  the  devil  to  be  dissolved 
in  my  heart  in  an  eminent  manner,  my  understanding  enlightened,  my 
will  melted  and  softened,  and  of  a  stone  made  flesh,  disposed  to  receive, 
and  disposed  to  return  to  God.  And,  thirdly,  I  found  my  spirit  clothed 
with  a  new  nature,  naturally  inclining  me  to  good ;  whereas  before 
it  was  naturally  inclined  to  evil.  And  I  found  in  me  henceforth  two 
contrary  principles,  spirit  against  flesh,  and  flesh  against  spirit.  And  this 
difference  I  found,  not  by  reading  or  hearing  any  one  speak  of  it,  but,  as 
Austin  did,  I  perceived  it  of  myself,  and  wondered  at  it  j  for  I  may  say  of 
this  combat,  that  it  is  proper  and  peculiar  to  men  that  are  regenerate."  Then 
follows  an  account  of  the  influence  that  this  great  change  had  on  his  views  of 
truth  and  on  his  way  of  preaching.  And  preaching  on  this  very  subject 
afterwards,  he  says  :  "  When  God  turneth  any  man  to  Himself,  He  fasteneth 
that  man's  will.  The  Holy  Ghost  sits  there,  at  the  centre  of  his  soul,  and 
hath  a  chief  hand  upon  the  stern  of  a  man's  spirit.  My  brethren,  your  wills 
are  the  slipperiest  things  in  the  world,  the  fullest  of  a  lubricity,  of  a  fickle 
ness.  .  .  .  Therefore,  above  all,  desire  the  Lord  to  fasten  your  wills,  to 
hold  His  hand  upon  that  stern  always  to  guide  you."  "The  will," 
says  Manton,  "  is  more  corrupted  than  the  mind  :  the  understanding  is 
much  blinded,  but  the  will  is  more  depraved.  .  .  .  We  are  convinced  often 
when  not  converted."  (On  the  whole  subject  of  the  will,  see  Macpherson's 
Confession  of  Faith,  chap.  ix.  ;  also  Jonathan  Edwards'  magnificent  work, 
A  Careful  and  Strict  Enquiry  into  the  Prevailing  Notions  of  the  Freedom  of 
the  Will) 

doth  persuade  and  enable — To  persuade  is  to  operate  on  the  feelings  and 
affections,  and  to  draw  the  mind  to  a  determination  by  presenting  sufficient 
motives.  "  My  brethren,  it  is  not  the  offers  of  eternity  ;  it  is  not  all  the 
persuasions  of  men  or  angels,  nor  of  the  Holy  Ghost  Himself,  if  they  be  but 
mere  moral  persuasions,  will  make  a  man  part  with  a  bird  in  the  hand  for  two 
in  the  bush.  My  meaning  is,  that  will  make  a  man  part  with  his  lusts,  or 
his  pleasures  and  sins,  and  take  and  accept  the  offers  of  eternity  ;  but  it  must 
be  the  power  of  God,  with  whom  all  things  are  possible,  and  He  must  put 
forth  as  much  power  to  work  this,  as  He  putteth  forth  to  work  all  things  else  " 
(Goodwin). 


JUSTIFICATION.  77 

to  embrace  Jesus  Christ,  freely  offered  to  us — En,  and  bras,  the  arm  ; 
to  clasp  in  the  arms,  to  cling  to  with  warmth  and  earnestness  :  to  cherish 
with  affection.  "Paul  called  unto  him  the  disciples,  and  embraced  them." 
"  Having  seen  and  embraced  the  promises." 

in  the  gospel.  "  Godspell,  the  word  of  God  "  (Wedgwood).  "  The  life 
of  Christ.  A.  S.  God,  God  ;  and  spell,  a  story,  history,  narrative.  Thus  the 
literal  sense  is  the  'narrative  of  God,'  i.e.  the  life  of  Christ"  (Skeat).  See 
Cruden  for  the  scriptural  sense  of  the  word. 

"The  gospel  call  is  universal  in  the  sense  that  it  is  addressed  to  all  men 
indiscriminately  to  whom  the  gospel  is  sent.  It  is  confined  to  no  age,  nation, 
or  class  of  men.  ...  If  therefore  any  one  holds  any  view  of  the  decrees  of 
God,  or  of  the  satisfaction  of  Christ,  or  of  any  other  scriptural  doctrine, 
which  hampers  him  in  making  the  general  offer  of  the  gospel,  he  may 
be  sure  that  his  views  or  his  logical  processes  are  wrong.  The  apostles 
were  not  thus  hampered,  and  we  act  under  the  commission  given  to  them  " 
(Hodge). 

USES. — I.    "  I  had  rather  feel  compunction,  than  understand  the  definition 
thereof"  (a  Kempis). 

2.  "Consider,   then,  thou  called  soul,  called  with  an  holy  calling,  that 
through  that  little  chink,    or  narrow   passage  from  death  to  life,  thy 
effectual  calling,  which   was  thy   first  entrance  into  thy  eternity,  thou 
mayest  first  contemplate  that  purposing  grace  of  God's  will  set  on  thee  ; 
for  by  calling  election  is  made  sure.   ...  A  saint's  being  called  is  the 
immediate  fruit  and  breaking   forth  of  purposing    and   electing  grace. 
Whom  He  hath  predestinated,  them  He  also  called  "  (Goodwin). 

3.  "  We  were  safer  in  slighting  the  Incarnation  and   Atonement  of  the 
Son  of  man,  against  whom  sins  may  be  forgiven,  than  in  slighting  the  work 
of  the  Spirit,  against  whom,  if  we  persevere  in  sin,  it   shall  neither  be 
forgiven  in  this  life,  nor  in  the  world  to  come  "  (Irving). 

4.  A  minister  writes  : — "  When  I  catechise  my  children  or  my  servants,  I 
ask  them,  What  is  effectual  calling?  and  they  answer  me  according  to 
what  is  written  in  their  book.     But  now  I  am  retired  to  catechise  my 
self,  must  I  not  be  careful  to  answer  according  to  what  is  written  in  my 
heart  ?     O  my  soul,  what  a  difference  there  is  betwixt  answering  this 
question  by  the  words  of  the  book,  and  from  the  experience  of  my  own 
heart  !  " 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Explain  the  theological  terms— Outward  Call ;  Inward  Call ;  Common  Grace ; 
Sufficient  Grace ;  Preventing  Grace ;  Co-operating  Grace ;  Sovereign  Grace ;  Free 
Grace ;  Habitual  Grace. 

2.  Explain  Hooker's  words :  Appetite  is  the  will's  solicitor,  and  the  will  is  appe 
tite's  controller. 

3.  Explain  the  passage  in  the  Tenth  Article  of  the  English  Church :  The  grace  of 
God  by  Christ  preventing  us,  that  we  may  have  a  good  will,  and  working  with 
us  when  we  have  that  will.     What  does  the  Confession,  x.  4,  mean  by  the  phrase  : 
Common  operations  of  the  Spirit  ? 

4.  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  statement :  Conviction  of  sin  is  the  punitive  office 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  ? 

5.  Explain  and  illustrate  from  Scripture  the  Puritan  expression :  law-work. 


78  THE    SHORTER    CATECHISM    WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

6.  Study  the  development  and  distribution  of  the  Spirit's  work  as  here  set  forth. 
Point  out  and  shortly  explain  the  fiue  words  that  describe  it,  and  honestly  ask  your 
self  at  each  step  of  the  study,  Has  that  work  been  effectually  wrought  in  me? 


Q.  32.  What  benefits  do  they  that  are  effectually  called  partake  of 
in  this  life  ? 

A.  They  that  are  effectually  called  do  in  this  life  partake  of 
justification,*  adoption,"  and  sanctification,  and  the  several  bene 
fits  which  in  this  life  do  either  accompany  or  flow  from  them.v 

*  Rom.  viii.  30  :  Moreover,  whom  he  did  predestinate,  them  he  also  called  ; 
and  whom  he  called,  them  he  also  justified  ;  and  whom  he  justified,  them  he  also 
glorified. 

u  Eph.  i.  5  :  Having  predestinated  us  unto  the  adoption  of  children  by  Jesus 
Christ  to  himself. 

v  i  Cor.  i.  26  :  For  ye  see  your  calling,  brethren,  how  that  not  many  wise  men 
after  the  flesh,  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,  are  called.  Ver.  30  :  But  of 
him  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us  wisdom,  and  righteous 
ness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption. 


effectually  called — See  Answer  31. 

in  this  life — See  Answer  36.  In  this  life,  God,  of  His  free  grace  and 
by  His  Holy  Spirit,  justifies,  adopts,  and  sanctifies  every  soul  He  effectually 
calls  (Rom.  viii.  30). 

The  attentive  student  will  observe  that  this  Question  is  introductory  to  the 
six  Questions  that  follow.  He  will  do  well  to  study  and  trace  the  connection 
and  sequence  of  thought  between  Question  29  and  Question  38. 


Q-  33-    What  is  justification  ? 

A.  Justification  is  an  act  of  God's  free  grace,  wherein  he 
pardoneth  all  our  sins,w  and  accepteth  us  as  righteous  in  his  sight,x 

w  Rom.  iii.  24  :  Being  justified  freely  by  his  grace,  through  the  redemption  that 
is  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  Ver.  25  :  Whom  God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation 
through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness  for  the  remission  of  sins. 
Rom.  iv.  6  :  Even  as  David  also  describeth  the  blessedness  of  the  man,  unto 
whom  God  imputeth  righteousness  without  works,  Ver.  7  :  Saying,  Blessed  are 
they  whose  iniquities  are  forgiven,  and  whose  sins  are  covered.  Ver.  8  :  Blessed 
is  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord  will  not  impute  sin. 

x  2  Cor.  v.  19 :  God  was  in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world  unto  himself,  not 
imputing  their  trespasses  unto  them  ;  and  hath  committed  unto  us  the  word  of 
reconciliation.  Ver.  21 :  That  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in 
him. 


JUSTIFICATION.  79 

only  for  the  righteousness  of  Christ  imputed  to  us,y  and  received 
by  faith  alone.2 

y  Rom.  v.  17  :  The  gift  of  righteousness.  Ver.  18 :  By  the  righteousness  of  one 
the  free  gift  came  upon  all  men  unto  justification  of  life.  Ver.  19  :  By  the 
obedience  of  one  shall  many  be  made  righteous. 

z  Gal.  ii.  1 6  :  Knowing  that  a  man  is  not  justified  by  the  works  of  the  law,  but 
by  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  even  we  have  believed  in  Jesus  Christ,  that  we  might 
be  justified  by  the  faith  of  Christ,  and  not  by  the  works  of  the  law :  for  by  the 
works  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh  be  justified.  Phil.  iii.  9 :  And  be  found  in  him, 
not  having  mine  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  law,  but  that  which  is  through 
the  faith  of  Christ,  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith. 

We  owe  the  full  and  clear  exhibition  of  the  great  Christian  doctrine  of 
justification,  as  we  here  possess  it,  to  the  labours  of  the  Reformation  divines. 
The  Greek  Fathers,  after  centuries  of  study  and  discussion,  bequeathed  to 
the  Church  universal  the  noble  inheritance  of  the  doctrines  of  God,  of  the 
Trinity,  and  of  the  Person  of  Christ,  as  all  the  orthodox  Churches  now  possess 
them.  The  Greek  Church,  the  Latin  Church,  and  the  Reformed  Church  all 
substantially  accept  the  same  answer  to  the  questions,  What  is  God  ?  How 
many  Persons  are  there  in  the  Godhead  ?  and  How  did  the  Son  of  God  be 
come  man  ?  And  happily,  the  agreement  that  extends  thus  far  extends  still 
farther.  For  as  there  is  no  confessional  disharmony  among  the  Churches  on 
the  Person  of  Christ,  neither  is  there  any  schism  among  them  on  the  great 
evangelical  doctrine  of  His  atoning  and  redeeming  work.  But  when  we 
come  to  treat  of  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  "applying  the  redemption 
purchased  by  Christ,"  errors  the  most  serious,  if  not  fatal,  are  taught  by  the 
Church  of  Rome.  And  as  the  development  and  vindication  of  the  theological 
doctrine  of  God  and  Christ  made  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries  for  ever 
famous,  so  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  stand  out  above  all  that 
went  before  them  in  their  full  and  clear  exhibition  and  promulgation  of  the 
doctrines  of  grace.  And  among  the  cloud  of  witnesses  God  has  from  time 
to  time  raised  up  to  preach  His  truth,  Luther,  and  Calvin,  and  Knox,  and 
Owen,  and  Bunyan  stand  in  the  front  rank  besid,e  Athanasius,  and  Cyril, 
and  Augustine.  All  those  men,  each  in  his  own  age  and  church,  proved 
themselves  the  true  successors  of  the  apostles  in  the  drawing  out  and  defence 
of  scriptural  and  saving  truth. 

Justification — In  entering  on  this  great  subject,  it  must  be  clearly  seen  and 
understood  that  the  whole  idea  and  conception  of  justification  rests  and  operates 
on  the  ground  of  the  divine  law.  And  the  divine  law  is  an  eternal  ground, 
eternal  and  unchangeable  as  God  Himself.  And  all  law  to  be  law  must  have  its 
inseparable  sanctions  ;  that  is  to  say,  it  must  be  adequately  supported  and 
unflinchingly  enforced.  Now  both  nature  in  conscience,  and  revelation 
in  Scripture,  testify  that  we  are  in  all  things  and  at  all  times  under  law  to 
God,  under  a  law  moreover  that  has  sanctions  of  reward  and  punishment 
corresponding  to  the  greatness  of  our  trespass  or  the  merit  of  our  obedience. 
The  apostolic  and  Protestant  sense  of  this  word  is  not  the  same  as  its  strict 
etymological  sense.  According  to  its  root,  the  word  literally  means  to  make 
just  or  righteous.  But  in  its  secondary  and  scriptural  sense  it  means  to 
count  and  pronounce  just  or  righteous.  In  gospel  justification,  God  treats  a 
sinner  as  if  he  were  a  just  man.  How  God  can  be  both  a  just  God  and  a 


8o  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

Saviour,  we  are  on  the  way  to  see.  But  let  the  student  always  remember 
that  justification  is  the  antithesis  of  condemnation,  and  he  will  never  go 
wrong  on  this  essential  truth  of  the  gospel.  This  contrast  and  the  true  sense 
of  the  terms  are  to  be  seen  in  such  passages  of  Scripture  as  Rom.  viii.  I,  33,  34. 
Condemnation  is  the  act  of  a  judge,  so  is  justification.  If  this  simple  and 
clear  distinction  is  kept  before  the  mind,  there  will  be  little  danger  of  error 
or  mistake  in  what  follows  on  justification,  and  sanctification,  and  saving 
faith. 

an  act — As  distinguished  from  a  work.  Even  a  child,  if  he  is  intelligently 
taught,  should  never  mistake  and  say  that  justification  is  a  work.  A  judge's 
sentence  is  an  act ;  it  is  uttered  and  executed  at  once.  A  teacher's  work  and 
a  physician's  extend  from  day  to  day,  and  year  to  year.  Now  God's  act  in 
justification  is  the  sentence  of  a  judge,  while  the  Spirit's  work  in  sanctification 
is  that  of  a  heavenly  Teacher  and  Healer  sent  from  God.  Q.  Why  do  you  call 
justification  an  act  and  not  a  work  ? — A.  Because  it  is  a  thing  done  all  at  once, 
as  the  sentence  or  declaration  of  a  judge  ;  and  not  a  work  of  time,  carried  on 
by  degrees,  as  effectual  calling  and  sanctification  are  (Willison's  Catechism). 

of  God's  free  grace  —  "  If  it  be  asked,  How  it  is  an  act  of  free  grace 
by  which  we  are  justified,  since  it  is  through  the  redemption  that  is  in 
Christ  ?  The  answer  is  this  :  The  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  is  the  channel 
through  which  justifying  grace  freely  flows  to  us.  It  was  free  grace  that 
provided  a  Saviour,  free  grace  that  led  the  soul  to,  and  gave  it  an  interest 
in,  the  Saviour  ...  To  the  Saviour  Himself,  it  is  indeed  an  act  of  strict 
justice,  that  His  people  should  be  justified,  since  He  has  paid  the  full  price 
of  it.  But  to  His  people  who  receive  the  benefits  of  redemption,  it  is  grace 
from  the  foundation  to  the  copestone "  (Green).  (See  Larger  Catechism, 
Answer  71.) 

pardoneth  all  our  sins— Forgiveth,  remitteth  a  penalty  ;  per-donare — 
thoroughly  to  forgive.  So  far  true  and  scriptural.  But  gospel  justification  is 
more  and  better  than  mere  pardon.  Pardon  is  an  act  of  grace  where  no  repara 
tion  or  satisfaction  has  been  made.  But  in  the  gospel,  forgiveness  of  sin  is  offered 
and  bestowed  on  the  ground  of  a  reparation  and  satisfaction  having  been  made 
to  the  broken  law.  If  a  criminal  expiates  his  crimes,  and  exhausts  his  sen 
tence,  it  is  not  a  pardon  he  receives  when  his  chains  are  struck  off  and  his 
prison  door  is  thrown  open.  He  can  claim  his  freedom  as  an  act  of  justice. 
And  the  Scripture  asserts  that  it  is  but  an  act  of  "faithfulness"  and  "jus 
tice  "  to  the  penitent  believer  when  God  bestows  forgiveness  upon  him. 
True ;  in  gospel  justification,  the  sinner  has  not  in  himself  made  satisfaction 
or  endured  the  penalty,  but  then  the  whole  gospel  goes  on  this,  that  Another 
has  done  all  this  for  him  ;  his  Surety  has  met  the  bond  and  accusation,  and 
on  the  ground  of  that  offered  and  accepted  satisfaction  the  sinner  is 
righteously  absolved  and  set  free.  Pardon  is  an  act,  but  it  is  a  continued, 
a  constantly-repeated  act.  We  "  daily  break  the  commandments  of  God  in 
thought,  word,  and  deed."  And  to  meet  this,  our  Lord  hath  taught  us  to 
pray  for  the  daily  forgiveness  of  sin.  "Nor  do  I  dislike  the  remark  of 
Chrysostom,  that  the  verb  in  the  present  tense,  who  takcth  away,  denotes  a 
continued  act ;  for  the  satisfaction  that  Christ  once  made  is  always  in  full 
vigour  "  (Calvin  on  John  i.  29). 

and  accepteth  us —  Acceptance  is  a  Scripture  word — "He  hath  made 
us  accepted  in  the  Beloved  "  (Eph.  i.  6).  And  the  fact  that  this  definition  of 


JUSTIFICATION.  8 1 

justification  embraces  this  element,  goes  to  prove  our  contention  above,  that 
justification  is  more  and  better  than  mere  pardon.  A  sovereign  may  pardon 
a  criminal,  but  the  pardoned  man  may  be  abhorred  and  eschewed  by  him  to 
whose  clemency  or  statesmanship  he  owes  his  pardon.  To  see  how  different 
it  is  with  a  justified  man,  read  the  context  of  the  above  scripture. 

as  righteous  —  We  are  not  in  ourselves  righteous,  for,  ex  hypothesi, 
we  are  condemned  sinners ;  but  the  way  of  salvation  through  Christ  meets 
all  our  case,  and  the  justification  which  is  here  under  discussion  has  this 
as  its  essential  feature,  that  it  "justifies  the  ungodly."  In  effectual  calling  and 
sanctification,  God  makes  us  righteous ;  in  justification  He  accepteth  us  as 
righteous.  By  infusing  or  implanting  righteousness,  He  renews  and  sanctifies 
us  ;  by  imputing  righteousness,  He  justifies  us.  He  never  does  the  one 
without  in  the  same  subject  doing  the  other  ;  but  they  are  separate  operations 
or  acts  of  His,  and  those  acts  and  operations  are  clearly  set  forth  in  the 
Answers  immediately  before  us. 

in  his  sight — "This  expression  is  a  continuation  of  the  forensic  scenery. 
God  is  on  His  judicial  throne.  Men  are  standing  at  the  bar.  The  justifica 
tion  referred  to  is  the  justification  that  is  realizable  in  a  court  of  justice.  .  .  . 
The  therapeutical  production  of  inherent  righteousness  is  also  and  amply 
provided  for.  Justification  is  really  in  order  to  sanctification.  It  is  a  stepping- 
stone  to  something  beyond  itself.  And  it  is  no  disparagement  to  the  greater 
blessing,  which  is  realized  in  the  production  of  inherent  righteousness  or 
holiness,  that  it  is  ruled  under  a  different  rubric  than  the  term  justification  " 
(Morison). 

only  for  the  righteousness  of  Christ  —  The  prophetic  and  apostolic 
conception  of  righteousness  differs  fundamentally  from  all  those  concep 
tions  of  this  noble  idea  that  have  ever  been  entertained  in  the  world  of 
religion  and  morals  outside  the  sphere  of  divine  revelation.  Righteous 
ness,  as  the  writers  of  Holy  Scripture  set  it  before  us,  is  first  a  divine 
attribute,  manifested  as  the  supreme  order  and  law  of  heaven ;  and  then 
after  and  under  that  it  is  a  condition  of  created  character,  a  state  of 
rectitude  and  uprightness  the  alone  source  and  supreme  standard  of  which 
is  God  Himself.  "I  will  fetch  knowledge  from  _ afar,"  says  the  prophet, 
"  and  I  will  ascribe  righteousness  to  my  Maker."  So  far  all  is  clear  and 
plain.  But  what  is  this  "  righteousness  of  Christ "  of  which  such  things 
are  said  in  Scripture  and  Confession  and  Catechism  ?  The  righteousness  of 
Christ  is  the  result  of  His  life  of  voluntary,  sponsorial,  and  perfect  obedience 
to  the  whole  law  of  God  under  which  He  with  and  for  us  was  born  ; 
His  life  of  obedience  and  then  His  death  of  atonement  for  our  sins. 
Jesus,  as  the  CHRIST,  the  second  Adam,  the  Surety,  the  Lamb  of  God, 
wrought  out  a  righteousness  and  acquired  a  merit,  "finished  a  work," 
which  according  to  the  covenant  of  grace  is  made  over  to  those  who  by 
repentance  and  faith  are  found  in  Him.  He  was  "  made  under "  our 
law  ;  He  magnified  it,  and  made  it  honourable  ;  and  we  were  represented 
by  Him  in  all  He  did.  From  the  first  breath  of  humiliation  He  drew  in  the 
manger  of  Bethlehem  to  the  last  sigh  of  resignation  He  heaved  on  the  cross 
of  Calvary,  in  both  and  in  all  that  came  to  Him  between  them,  Jesus  was 
acting  for  God  and  for  us  as  THE  CHRIST.  And  now  because  of  Christ's 
work,  God  is  the  justifier  of  the  ungodly,  and  in  Christ  and  before  God  the 
sinner  becomes  the  justified.  This,  then,  is  "  the  righteousness  of  Christ "  of 


82  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM    WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

which  we  read  so  much  in  the  Epistles  of  Paul.  There  is  no  subject  the 
apostle  deals  with  with  such  pains  and  power  and  joy.  There  is  nothing  that 
gives  Him  such  gladness  as  to  be  able  to  offer  to  sinners  the  "gift  of 
righteousness."  And  there  is  nothing  that  arouses  His  power  of  rebuke 
and  expostulation  like  seeing  this  divine  gift  despised  and  rejected.  "Do 
we  ask  of  Paul  what  is  the  great  want  of  man?  He  will  answer  it  is 
righteousness.  Ask  what  is  gained  for  man  by  redemption  ?  Again  he 
answers,  righteousness.  What  is  the  subject  of  gospel  preaching  ?  Jesus 
died  and  rose  again,  that  we  might  be  made  righteous.  What  is  the  pur 
port  of  the  gospel  ?  To  declare  to  men  that  henceforth  there  is  a  way  by 
which  they  may  attain  to  righteousness.  What  is  that  which  redounds  most 
to  the  glory  of  God  ?  It  is  that  He  has  revealed  the  possibility  of  His  being 
at  once  just  and  a  justifier.  We  do  not  need  to  multiply  these  examples  ;  as 
the  reply  to  all  questions,  the  substance  of  all  arguments,  the  basis  of  all 
definitions,  we  shall  find  righteousness"  (Reuss).  (See  Greatheart's  discourse 
to  the  pilgrims  on  the  Righteousness  of  Christ. ) 

imputed  to  us — Imptitare,  to  reckon  or  credit  with,  to  set  down  to  any 
one's  account.  Imputation  is  a  scriptural  word  which  the  Holy  Ghost  has 
used,  and  designs  us  to  use,  in  describing  one  of  the  divine  steps  in  the  act 
of  justification.  The  word  literally  means  to  set  down  to  any  one's  account, 
to  lay  to  any  one's  charge.  At  the  same  time,  to  impute  may  mean  either 
of  two  things.  It  may  either  mean  to  lay  to  the  charge  of  any  one  what  he 
himself  has  actually  done,  as  in  Ps.  xxxii.  2,  2  Cor.  v.  19  ;  or  it  may  mean  to 
lay  to  one's  charge,  and  reckon  to  one's  account,  what  another  has  done  as 
representing  him,  and  as  standing  and  acting  in  his  room  and  stead.  This 
latter  is  the  fixed  and  invariable  sense  of  the  word  in  all  those  scriptures  and 
scriptural  creeds  that  treat  of  Adam  and  his  posterity,  and  of  Christ  and  His 
people.  To  impute  in  the  Adamic  and  Christian  sense,  is  to  account  to  the 
children  what  has  been  done  by  their  father  acting  in  their  name  ;  it  is  to 
count  and  treat  with  the  members  as  one  with  their  covenant  Head.  This 
physical,  moral,  and  spiritual  law  runs  through  the  whole  scheme  and  consti 
tution  of  human  life  on  the  earth.  National  life,  social  life,  family  life,  are 
all  full  of  illustrations  of  this  federal  principle,  and  the  scriptural  and  cate 
chetical  doctrines  of  the  oneness  of  Adam  and  his  children  and  of  Christ  and 
His  people  are  but  divine  revelations  of  the  universality  and  depth  of  the 
federal  and  solidary  law  of  human  life.  There  are  but  two  men,  says  Thomas 
Goodwin,  who  are  seen  standing  before  God,  Adam  and  Jesus  Christ ;  and 
these  two  men  have  all  other  men  hanging  at  their  girdles.  (See  this  same 
subject  treated  under  Question  16.) 

As  was  to  be  expected,  this  word  is  frequently  found  in  Paul,  he  being 
the  apostle  who  was  appointed  and  enabled  to  set  forth  most  clearly  and  fully 
the  divine  way  of  justification.  (See  Reuss  above.)  Indeed,  so  fundamental 
and  ever  present  is  this  idea  with  the  apostle,  that  an  exegetical  author  writing 
on  this  subject  is  able  with  perfect  truth  to  say,  "  I  know  of  no  passage  in  the 
New  Testament  in  which  the  doctrine  of  imputation  is  more  distinctly  and 
unequivocally  expressed  than  in  a  text  where  the  word  imputation  is  not  used. 
It  is  this  :  '  For  He  hath  made  Him  to  be  sin  for  us  who  knew  no  sin, 
that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him.'"  "  Justificatio 
must  be  taken  as  the  old  Protestant  dogmatists  rightly  took  it,  sensuforensi, 
i.e.  imputatively .  .  .  .  All  interpretations  that  overlook  the  fact  of  imputa 
tion,  such  as  the  Roman  Catholic,  are  erroneous "  (De  Wette  in  Alford, 
Rom.  i.  17). 


JUSTIFICATION.  83 

"  The  more  strictly  we  attach  the  character  of  a  legal  and  judicial  procedure 
to  the  act  of  God  in  justification,  so  much  the  better.  .  .  .  We  can  scarcely 
err  in  the  direction  of  viewing  justification  too  forensically, — casting  it  too 
strongly  into  the  mould  of  what  passes,  or  may  be  supposed  to  pass,  in  a 
court  of  law.  .  .  .  Then,  indeed,  grace  shines  forth  in  it  conspicuously, — 
grace  providing  the  substitute  ;  grace  making  us  one  with  the  substitute  ; 
grace  receiving  us  and  dealing  with  us  as  one  with  the  substitute.  Thus  to 
conserve  its  gracious  character,  it  is  indispensably  necessary  to  hold  fast  and 
firm  the  forensic  character  of  justification  "  (Candlish,  Fatherhood). 

received  by  faith  alone.  "  To  the  objection  that  the  exclusive  term  alone 
is  not  found  in  Scripture,  it  is  replied,  that  though  the  word  be  not  found 
syllabically  used  with  this  purpose,  yet  there  are  exceptive  expressions 
equivalent  unto  it"  (Owen). 

"At  some  point  or  other  it  was  necessary  to  draw  a  line  between  the 
Catholic  and  Reformed  doctrines  of  justification.  Was  it  to  include  works  as 
well  as  faith  ?  but,  if  not,  was  love  to  be  a  coefficient  in  the  work  of  justifica 
tion  ?  They  felt  this  difficulty,  and  tried  to  preserve  the  doctrine  from  the 
alloy  of  self-righteousness  and  external  acts  by  the  formula  of  faith  only" 
(Jowett). 

"  Luther  and  his  apologists  were  taunted  as  being  solifidians  ( faith  - 
alone-ians)  and  fide  solarians.  They  accepted  the  taunt,  so  far  as  the  matter 
of  justification  is  concerned,  and  gloried  in  it.  But  they  ever  contended  that 
faith  must  not,  and  does  not,  remain  solitary  in  the  soul.  Their  maxim  was, 
that  'faith  never  exists  without  works,  although  it  justifies  without  works.' 
*  No  works,'  says  a  Latin  writer.  '  have  place  in  the  justification  of  man 
before  God.  Men  are  justified  by  faith  alone,  without  works,  moral,  cere 
monial,  or  judicial,  of  any  law  whatsoever,  whether  natural,  Mosaical,  or 
evangelical.'  It  is  altogether  uncalled  for  to  deny  that  an  unbeliever  may  be 
in  some,  or  perhaps  in  many  respects  a  noble  man, — noble  in  honesty,  noble 
in  honour,  noble  in  patriotism,  noble  in  philanthropy.  Yet  his  nobility  of 
character  has  no  justifying  element  in  it.  Perfect  nobility  in  all  relations, 
God  ward  and  manward, — perfect  and  full-orbed  righteousness  from  beginning 
to  ending  of  his  probationary  career, — would  be  requisite,  if  man  were  to  be 
justified  by  works  of  law."  (See  Dr.  Morison's  fine  Monograph  on  Romans 
Third.) 

"  But  you  will  say,  Is  not  faith  an  act  ?  It  is  true,  it  is,  in  a  grammatical 
signification,  an  act ;  but  in  the  true,  real  import  of  it,  it  is  merely  passive. 
Faith  doth  not  give  anything  to  God,  as  love  doth  ;  faith  only  suffers  God  to 
be  good  to  it ;  it  takes  in  that  salvation  which  grace  would  bestow  upon  it. 
My  brethren,  the  hands  of  all  the  other  graces  are  working  hands,  but  the 
hands  of  faith  are  merely  receiving  hands  ;  now  saith  the  apostle,  Not  to  him 
that  worketh,  but  believe th  "  (Goodwin). 

USES. — i.  "I  cannot  but  think  it  best  for  those  who  would  learn  or  teach 
the  doctrine  of  justification  in  a  due  manner,  to  place  their  consciences  in 
the  presence  of  God,  and  their  persons  before  His  tribunal,  and  then, 
upon  a  due  consideration  of  His  greatness,  power,  majesty,  righteousness, 
holiness,  to  inquire  what  the  Scriptures  and  a  sense  of  their  own  condi 
tion  direct  them  unto  as  their  relief  and  refuge,  and  what  plea  it  becomes 
them  to  make  for  themselves"  (Owen). 

2.   "  God  did,  from  all  eternity,  decree  to  justify  all  the  elect  ;  and  Christ 


84  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

did,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  die  for  their  sins,  and  rise  again  for  their 
justification  ;  nevertheless  they  are  not  justified,  until  the  Holy  Spirit 
cloth  in  due  time  actually  apply  Christ  unto  them  "  (Confession  of  Faith). 

3.  "We  seldom  sit  down  to  meat  but  we  eat  and  leave;  so  there  is  in  Jesus 
Christ  more  merit  and  righteousness  than  the  whole  world  has  need  of" 
(Interpreter's  aphorism  in  Pilgrinfs  Progress,  ii.). 

4.  "The  condescending    goodness    of   Scripture,    which    speaks    of  the 
righteousness  of  the  pious,  ought  not  to  be  treated  as  if  it  were  in  opposi 
tion  to  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  "  (Bengel). 

5.  "  At   that   time,   while  I  was   greatly  reproached   for   defending   this 
doctrine  in  the  pulpit,  and  just  upon  my  suffering  a  very  open  abuse  for 
it,  God's  work  wonderfully  broke  forth  among  us,  and  souls  began  to  flock 
to  Christ,  as  the  Saviour  in  whose  righteousness  alone  they  hoped  to  be 
justified.     So  that  this  was  the  doctrine  on  which  this  work,  in  its  begin 
ning,  was  founded,  as  it  evidently  was  in  the  whole   progress  of  it " 
(Jonathan  Edwards'  Thoughts  on  the  Revival  in  New  England). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Derive  Justification,  and  give  its  true  Pauline  and  Protestant  sense.     Can  you 
explain  Dr.  Cunningham's  statement  as  to  the  disservice  that  etymology  has  in  this 
instance  done  to  divine  truth  ? 

2.  The  old  divines  had  a  saying  to  the  effect  that  it  was  conviction  of  sin  that 
made  a  man  subjectum  capax  justificationis,  a  subject  for  justification.    Explain. 

3.  In   the  technical  language   of  theologians,  Regeneration   is   called  a  physical 
change,  and  Justification  a  forensic  change.     What  is  meant  by  these  terms  ? 

4.  Point  out  some  passages  of  Scripture  filled  with  forensic  scenery. 

5.  Explain  clearly  and  exactly  the  various  senses  of  righteousness  in  Rom.  Hi.  21, 
Phil.  Hi.  6-9. 

6.  Godet,  a  French  commentator  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  in  opening  up  Hi.  24, 
says:  This  notion,  being  justified,  is  qualified  in  three  directions;  in  the  mode, 
in  the  origin,  and  in  the  means.     Apply  the  same  analysis   and   qualification   to 
this  Answer. 

7.  Show  from  Scripture,  and  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  that  not  only  our  legal, 
but  our  evangelical  righteousness  also,  is  excluded  from  bearing  any  part  in  our 
justification. 

8.  Explain  the   saying,   which   Goodwin  describes  as   no   less   solid  than  elegant: 
Justification  is  neither  against  the  law  nor  according  to  the  law,  but   above 
the  law  and  for  the  sake  of  the  law. 

9.  Exhibit  and  establish  the  scriptural  and  experimental  consistency  between  the 
free  grace  of  God,  the  satisfaction  of  Christ,  and  the  necessity  of  good  works  in 
the  believer.    Reconcile  Rom.  Hi.  28  with  Jas.  ii.  24. 

10.  Commit    to     memory    Hooker's    famous    sentence :     There    is    a    glorifying 
righteousness   of  men  in   the  world   to   come,  and   there   is   a  justifying  and 
sanctifying  righteousness  here.    The  righteousness,  wherewith  we  shall  be  clothed 
in  the  world  to  come,  is  both  perfect  and  inherent ;  that  wherewith  we  are  justi 
fied  is  perfect,  but  not  inherent ;  that  by  which  we  are  sanctified,  inherent,  but 
not  perfect. 

11.  Explain  the  allusions,  and  take  to  heart  the  comfort  contained  in  the  following 
passage  from  Donne's  Sermons  .-—There  is  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in 
Christ  Jesus— not  if  every  grain  of  dust  were  an  Ahithophel,  and  gave  counsel 
against  me:  not  if  every  sand  upon  the  seashore  were  a  Rabshakeh,  and  railed 


ADOPTION.  85 

against  me ;  not  if  every  atom  in  the  air  were  a  Satan,  an  adversary,  an 
accuser ;  not  if  every  drop  in  the  sea  were  an  Abaddon,  an  Apollyon,  a  destroyer 
—there  could  be  no  condemnation  if  Christ  is  my  witness. 

12.  Prove  from  Scripture  that  though  justification  is  an  act,  it  may  be,  and  ought 
to  be,  a  dally  and  hourly  desired  and  renewed  act. 


Q.  34.    What  is  adoption  ? 

A.  Adoption  is  an  act  of  God's  free  grace,a  whereby  we  are 
received  into  the  number,  and.  have  a  right  to  all  the  privileges 
of  the  sons  of  God.b 

a  i  John  iii.  i :  Behold  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us, 
that  we  should  be  called  the  sons  of  God ! 

b  John  i.  12 :  But  as  many  as  received  him,  to  them  gave  he  power  to  become 
the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  his  name.  Rom.  viii.  17 :  And  if 
children,  then  heirs ;  heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heirs  with  Christ :  that  we  may  be 
also  glorified  together. 

Adoption  is  an  act  whereby  a  man  takes  into  his'  family  one  who  was  not 
originally  a  member  of  it,  and  gives  him  the  standing  and  privileges  of  a  son. 
"Neither  is  there  only  a  natural,  but  also  a  voluntary  and  civil  foundation 
of  paternity  ;  for  the  laws  have  found  a  way  by  which  a  man  may  become  a 
father  without  procreation,  and  this  imitation  of  nature  is  called  adoption  " 
(Pearson).  Adoption  is  a  scriptural  expression  made  use  of  to  set  forth  the 
sonship  relation  in  which  all  true  believers  stand  to  God  the  Father  on  and 
after  their  union  to  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  (See  Cruden  under  the  word; 
also  Dr.  Macgregor's  note  on  Gal.  iv.  5.) 

an  act — On  such  passages  as  Rom.  viii.  23,  i  John  iii.  2,  the  old  divines 
have  founded  the  distinction  of  adoptio  incompleta  or  imperfecta.  Compare 
what  has  been  said  above  on  justification  as  an  act. 

received  into  the  number— See  Answer  20.  They  are  "a  multitude 
which  no  man  could  number,"  but  they  are  all  well  known  to  God.  "The 
Lord  shall  count,  when  He  writeth  up  the  people,  that  this  man  was  born 
there/' 

a  right — At  first  sight  it  may  seem  strange  to  say  that  a  sinner,  even  a 
justified  sinner,  can  have  any  rights  as  before  God.  But  if  the  matter  is  fully 
considered,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  Catechism  is  true  both  to  legal  and 
domestic  usage,  as  well  as  to  Scripture,  in  so  speaking.  For  a  right  at  law 
can  be  established  on  proof  of  adoption  as  well  as  on  descent ;  on  a  donation 
as  well  as  on  conquest,  or  a  personal  and  original  possession.  For  the  scrip 
tural  usage  and  doctrinal  ground  see  John  i.  12,  margin,  and  the  Revised 
Version. 

Cf.  Zinzendorf 's  hymn  : 

"  When  from  the  dust  of  death  I  rise. 
To  claim  my  mansion  in  the  skies. 


86  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH    A   COMMENTARY. 

all  the  privileges — "  Liberties  and  privileges  "  (Larger  Catechism).  (For 
an  admirable  enumeration  of  the  "liberties  and  privileges  of  the  children  of 
God,"  see  Confession,  chap,  xii.,  with  Macpherson's  note.) 

the  sons  of  God.  "There  is  one  degree  of  sonship  founded  on  creation, 
and  that  is  the  lowest,  as  belonging  unto  all,  both  good  and  bad  j  another 
degree  above  that  there  is  grounded  upon  regeneration,  or  adoption,  belong 
ing  only  to  the  faithful  in  this  life ;  and  a  third  above  the  rest  founded  on  the 
resurrection,  or  collation  of  the  eternal  inheritance,  and  the  similitude  of 
God,  appertaining  to  the  saints  alone  in  the  world  to  come  (l  John  iii.  2). 
And  there  is  yet  another  degree  of  filiation,  of  a  greater  eminency  and  a 
different  nature,  appertaining  properly  to  none  of  these,  but  to  the  true  Son 
of  God  alone,  who  among  all  His  brethren  hath  only  received  the  title  of  His 
(nvn  Son  .  .  .  Christ  therefore  hath  called  God  after  a  peculiar  way  His 
own  Father.''''  (For  the  full  passage  see  Pearson,  art.  i.) 

Note. — The  position  taken  up  by  the  late  Principal  Candlish  in  his  eloquent 
work,  The  Fatherhood  of  God,  is  this.  The  original  condition  and  standing 
of  man,  with  all  its  gifts  and  privileges,  was  not  that  of  true  sonship.  It 
contained  the  germ  and  potency  of  sonship,  and  it  would  have  issued  in 
sonship  but  for  the  dreadful  catastrophe  of  the  fall.  But  as  his  hour  of 
temptation  found  Adam,  his  standing  toward  God  was  still  simply  that  of  an 
honoured  and  trusted  servant.  It  was  as  yet  purely  a  relation  of  Creator  and 
creature,  Lawgiver  and  subject ;  it  rested  on  divine  and  creative  right  on  the 
one  hand,  and  on  human  responsibility  on  the  other.  It  was  all  embodied  in 
a  covenant  of  works,  and  a  covenant  of  works  is  utterly  incompatible  with  a 
full  Fatherhood  on  the  one  hand,  or  with  a  secure  sonship  on  the  other. 
Man's  standing  as  constituted  in  creation  was  altogether  noble,  and  "very 
good,"  and  over  and  above  its  present  nobility  and  goodness  it  had  in  it  the 
seed  of  sonship  and  the  prelude  of  a  Divine  Paternity.  But  that  seed  was 
trodden  down  before  it  had  taken  proper  root,  and  the  yearnings  of  the 
Divine  Fatherhood  had  to  seek  their  scope  in  another  object  than  Adam,  and 
their  sphere  in  another  creation  than  that  of  which  he  was  the  high  priest  and 
the  head. 

But  the  Fatherhood  that  embraces  and  possesses  regenerate  men  is  no 
figure ;  it  is  as  real  and  true  as  that  Fatherhood  which  eternally  generates  and 
lovingly  embraces  the  Divine  Son  Himself.  It  is  as  real  and  true,  for  it  is 
one  and  the  same.  The  Fatherhood  of  God  toward  believers  is  grounded  on, 
and  indeed  is  nothing  else  than  an  extension  of  that  Fatherhood  that  followed, 
and  acknowledged,  and  sustained  the  descending  and  redeeming  Son  Himself. 
Our  Sonship  now  is  not  figurative  and  fugitive,  as  it  was  in  Adam ;  it  is  clear 
and  full,  safe  and  abiding  as  is  the  Sonship  of  Christ  Himself.  "  I  have  not 
hesitated,"  says  Dr.  Candlish,  "to  avow  my  belief  in  the  substantial  identity 
of  the  relation."  In  his  fifth  lecture,  "On  Adoption  as  connected  with  Re 
generation  and  Justification,"  the  same  author  says  :  "I  think  it  of  as  much 
consequence  to  maintain  the  thoroughly  unforensic  character  of  God's  act  in 
adopting,  as  it  is  to  maintain  the  strictly  forensic  character  of  His  act  in 
justifying.  All  is  legal  and  judicial  in  the  latter  act.  If  it  were  not  so,  there 
would  be  no  grace  in  it  at  all.  Nothing  is  legal  or  judicial  in  the  other;  if 
there  were  anything  of  that  sort  in  it,  all  its  grace  would  be  gone."  (See  the 
kindred  note  under  "Justification,"  p.  83  above.)  The  student  who  will  do 
justice  to  that  characteristically  acute,  original,  and  soaring  book  will  be  repaid 
with  lifelong  elevation  and  quickening  of  mind. 


SANCTIFICATION.  87 

USES. — I.  It  is  a  law  of  nature  that  like  produces  like.  And  that  law  of  a 
reproduction  of  likeness  happily  obtains  in  the  new  creation  also.  It  is 
the  heart  and  the  mind  that  are  made  new  in  regeneration,  and  it  is  in 
the  "renewed  mind,"  and  in  the  "new  heart,"  that  the  new  family 
features  reveal  themselves.  It  is  in  their  actions,  and  in  their  affections, 
that  the  children  of  God  discover  themselves,  and  give  evidence  of  their 
new  birth  and  supernatural  descent.  Even  a  foundling,  who  cannot  give 
an  account  of  himself,  may  have  his  parentage  traced  by  his  features  and 
his  complexion  ;  and  a  child  of  God  will  easily  be  discovered  among  the 
children  of  the  devil  by  his  holy  actions  and  heavenly  affections. 

2.  In  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  assurance  in  prayer  is  grounded  on  the 
Fatherhood  of  God  and  the  sonship  of  the  disciple.     (See  also  Ques 
tion  100.) 

3.  The  Divine  Paternity  is  also  set  forth  as  the  proper  ground  of  Christian 
patience  (Deut.  viii.  5  j  Ps.  ciii.  13  ;  Heb.  xii.  9,  10). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Derive  adoption :  refer  to  two  instances  of  this   act  in  the  Old  Testament,  and 
quote  some  leading  passages  in  the  New  Testament  where  this  subject  is  treated  of. 

2.  Explain  the  axiom :  Sonship  is  a  personal  property,  not  a  property  of  the 
nature. 

3.  Explain  the  saying  of  Zanchius :  Plus  est  nos  esse  filios  quam  esse  sanctos 
(It  is  better  to  be  a  son  than  a  saint). 

4.  In  what  sense,  and  with  what  enlargement  of  meaning,  is  the  term  adoption 
used  by  the  apostle  in  Rom.  viii.  23  ?    (See  Pearson,  above.) 

5.  Explain  adoptio  incompleta  or  imperfecta. 

6.  Do  you  know,  or  can  you  discover,  anything  about  the  Adoptionist  controversy 
in  connection  with  the  doctrine  of  the  Person  of  Christ  ? 


Q.  35.   What  is  sanctification  ? 

A.  Sanctification  is  the  work  of  God's  free  grace,6  whereby  we 
are  renewed  in  the  whole  man  after  the  image  of  God,d  and  are 
enabled  more  and  more  to  die  unto  sin,  and  live  unto  righteous 
ness.6 

c  2  Thess.  ii.  13  :  Salvation  through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit,  and  belief  of  the 
truth. 

d  Eph.  iv.  23 :  And  be  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  your  mind  ;  Ver.  24.  And  that 
ye  put  on  the  new  man,  which  after  God  is  created  in  righteousness  and  true 
holiness. 

«  Rom.  vi.  4 :  Therefore  we  are  buried  with  him  by  baptism  into  death  ;  that 
like  as  Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,  even  so  we 
also  should  walk  in  newness  of  life.  Ver.  6.  Knowing  this,  that  our  old  man  is 
crucified  with  him,  that  the  body  of  sin  might  be  destroyed,  that  henceforth  we 
should  not  serve  sin.  Rom.  viii.  i  :  There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to 
them  which  are  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit. 

The  word  sanctification,  with  its  cognates  saint,  sanctuary,  and  such  like, 
occurs  a  great  number  of  times,  and  in  a  great  variety  of  senses,  in  the  Holy 


88  THE   SHORTER    CATECHISM   WITH    A    COMMENTARY. 

Scriptures.  The  word,  like  the  work  it  describes,  grows  from  less  to  more  ; 
from  small  beginnings  at  first  to  a  great  fulness  and  depth  of  meaning  in  the 
end.  Beginning  in  the  most  outward,  conventional,  and  ceremonial  sense, 
it  ends,  as  in  the  text,  by  containing  and  setting  forth  the  most  inward, 
spiritual,  and  exalted  realities. 

Sanctification — Let  no  student  miss  consulting  Cruden's  most  valuable 
analysis  and  classification.  Calvin,  on  I  Cor.  i.  2,  says:  "Now  the  term 
sanctification  denotes  separation.  This  takes  place  in  us  when  we  are  regene 
rated  by  the  Spirit  to  newness  of  life,  that  we  may  serve  God  and  not  the 
world."  And  Godet,  on  John  xvii.  17  :  "The  Greek  word  to  sanctify  is  not 
synonymous  with  the  word  to  purify.  The  holy  is  not  opposed  to  the  impure, 
but  merely  to  the  natural.  To  sanctify  is  to  consecrate  to  a  religious  use 
anything  pertaining  to  common  life.  From  an  Old  Testament  point  of  view, 
consecration  was  an  external  and  ritual  act ;  under  the  New  Covenant,  where 
all  is  spiritual,  the  seat  of  consecration  is  first  in  the  heart,  the  will  of  the 
person  sanctified." 

the  work — Not,  like  justification  and  adoption, "an  act>  but  a  work  ;  a  process, 
having  its  beginning  in  regeneration  and  its  consummation  and  completion 
in  glory.  (See  Answer  33  under  act.)  Sanctification  is  often  called  a  work  in 
Scripture,  and  from  the  nature  of  the  case  the  student  will  see  that  this  is  the 
proper  term  to  apply  to  it.  For  regeneration  does  not  all  at  once  make  of 
a  sinner  a  new  man,  in  the  sense  of  extirpating  sinfulness  from  his  heart  and 
filling  his  life  with  the  fruits  of  righteousness.  The  seed  is  planted  in  the 
new  birth,  but  it  must  spring  up  and  grow  j  it  must  be  watched  and  watered, 
digged  about  and  pruned,  before  it  will  become  a  tree  of  righteousness. 
That  great  change  makes  the  sinner  a  child  of  God,  but  long  years  may  have 
to  pass  before  he  attains  the  stature  of  a  perfect  man  in  Christ  Jesus. 

God's  free  grace—"  Grace  is  not  of  merit,  but  merit  of  grace."  The  Latin 
Father  here  means  that  no  work  of  ours,  even  our  working  out  our  own 
salvation,  will  merit  aught  at  God's  hand ;  but  that  if  we  have  any  merit, 
if  we  do  aught  worthy  of  praise  or  reward,  it  is  all  of  grace.  In  the  old 
language  of  divines,  "  grace  prevents  merit."  And  all  grace  is  "free  grace." 
The  student  will  note  that  this  phrase  "free  grace"  occurs  three  times  in 
succession  in  this  part  of  the  Catechism.  Justification  is  an  act  of  God's 
free  grace ;  adoption  is  an  act  of  God's  free  grace  ;  sanctification  is  the  work 
of  God's  free  grace.  For  grace  see  Answer  20,  and  mark  what  Goodwin 
says  on  the  characteristically  Pauline  expression,  free  grace:  "  Rom.  iii.  24. 
The  word  freely  is  to  show  that  it  is  merely  grace;  it  is  without  cause,  it  is 
grace  dyed  in  grace,  as  I  used  to  say,  gracious  grace."  "To  make  a  man  a 
saint,  grace  is  absolutely  necessary  ;  and  whoever  doubts  this  does  not  know 
what  a  saint  is,  nor  what  a  man  is  "  (Pascal). 

renewed — Dr.  John  Duncan's  daughter  tells  us  in  her  diary  that  having  heard 
a  good  sermon  on  one  occasion  on  the  words,  "  For  the  will  of  God  is  your 
sanctification,"  and  having  spoken  well  of  it  to  her  father,  he  at  once  replied, 
"Did  it  begin  with  regeneration?"  This  question  of  Dr.  Duncan's  goes  to 
the  very  root  of  the  matter.  For  sanctification  is  no  mere  reformation  or 
refinement  of  manners  or  morals.  It  is  a  maxim  even  in  ethics,  that  the 
morality  of  the  man  must  precede  the  morality  of  his  actions.  Much  more  is 
it  a  law  of  Christ  and  His  Church.  "Make  the  tree  good."  Reformation 


SANCTIFICATION.  89 

and  sanctification  differ,  says  Dr.  Hodge,  as  clean  clothes  "differ  from  a  clean 
heart.  It  is  as  essential  to  a  truly  holy  life  as  it  is  to  a  good  sermon  on  a  holy 
life,  that  it  begin  with  regeneration.  (Confession,  chap,  xiii.)  Connect 
"  renewed"  in  this  Answer  with  "renewing"  in  Answer  31. 

in  the  whole  man — "I  pray  God  your  whole  spirit,  and  soul,  and  body 
be  preserved  blameless  unto  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  It  is  the 
teaching  of  Scripture  and  the  Catechism  that  sin  has  corrupted  the  whole 
man  in  every  man,  and  it  is  the  corresponding  offer  and  promise  of  God  in 
the  gospel  that  He  will  make  the  whole  man  in  spirit,  and  soul,  and  body 
blameless.  As  deep,  and  wide,  and  inward  as  is  the  taint  and  infection  of 
sin,  so  universal  and  so  thorough  will  the  work  of  sanctification  be.  Let  the 
theological  student  turn  to  Goodwin,  Index,  Sanctification. 

after  the  image  of  God — On  God?s  image  see  Answer  10.  No  man  hath 
seen  God  at  any  time,  but  Christ  is  His  express  image,  and  we  are  renewed 
after  the  image  of  God,  when  we  are  made  and  make  ourselves  after  the 
image  of  Christ.  The  Holy  Spirit  who  wrought  all  His  graces  in  Christ,  and 
made  Him  after  the  image  of  God,  works  in  us  in  like  manner.  He  works 
in  us  a  conformity  to  the  graces  that  are  in  Christ,  and  we  put  on  a  conformity 
to  His  example.  Holy  dispositions  and  heavenly  affections  are  the  features 
and  complexion  of  Christ  formed  in  us.  "':  In  adoption  we  are  taken  into  the 
family  of  God,  and  in  sanctification  we  take  on  us  the  family  features  in  tone 
and  manners. 

"  It  is  the  office  of  the  second  Adam  to  give  back  to  a  lapsed  race  the 
forfeited  image  of  God.  Nor  is  he,  as  the  Son  of  God,  the  renewer  only  of 
the  miserable  state  of  man,  but  equally  the  type  and  model  of  the  new 
creation.  Such  he  is,  both  with  respect  to  personal  purity,  and  to  his  eternal 
filial  relation  "  (Candlish,  Fatherhood}. 

enabled — "  In  which  war,  although  the  remaining  corruption  for  a  time 
may  prevail,  yet,  through  the  continual  supply  of  strength  from  the  sanctify 
ing  Spirit  of  Christ,  the  regenerate  part  doth  overcome  :  and  so  the  saints 
grow  in  grace,  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God  "  (Confession,  xiii.  3). 

more  and  more  to  die  unto  sin— A  familiar  form  of  thought  with  all  the 
more  spiritual  Scripture  writers,  with  the  psalmists  and  prophets,  with  John, 
and  Peter,  and  Paul.  To  die  unto  anything  is  to  become  indifferent  to  it,  to 
shake  off  its  power,  to  be  superior  to  its  attractions.  A  dead  man  hears  not, 
sees  not,  tastes  not,  smells  not,  feels  not ;  and  a  soul  spiritually  dead  to  sin 
would  be  in  a  world  of  sin  dead  to  it  all.  A  little  reflection  and  imagination 
will  enable  the  student  to  apprehend  and  appreciate  this  vivid  and  im 
pressive  scriptural  metaphor.  (But  see  Fraser's  criticism  of  this  phrase  in 
his  Scripture  Doctrine  of  Sanctification,  Rom.  vi.  2.) 

"Such  are  my  feelings  ;  and  every  day  of  my  life  I  bless  my  Redeemer, 
who  has  inspired  me  with  them,  and  who,  from  a  man  full  of  weakness, 
misery,  lust,  pride,  and  ambition,  has  made  me  a  man  exempt  from  all  these 
evils  by  the  power  of  His  grace,  to  which  all  the  glory  is  due,  as  of  myself  I 
have  nought  but  misery  and  error  "  (Pascal). 

and  live  unto  righteousness.  There  is,  no  doubt,  a  striking  and  instructive 
resemblance  between  a  death-bed  and  one  aspect  of  the  work  of  sanctifica 
tion  ;  but  there  is  a  fundamental  and  essential  contrast  also.  Death,  it  may 
be  said,  drives  out  and  destroys  life  in  a  dying  man,  but  in  a  godly  man  it  is 


90  THE   SHORTER    CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

the  new  life  that  expels  and  destroys  sin  and  death.  The  wisest  physicians 
do  not  content  themselves  with  striking  at  the  special  disease  to  which  their 
attention  has  been  called.  They  aim  also  at  strengthening  the  enfeebled 
constitution,  sure,  as  they  are,  that  returning  strength  will  be  their  best  ally  in 
rooting  out  any  local  and  particular  evil.  And  in  like  manner  evil  habits 
and  evil  affections  will  be  overcome  less  by  ascetic  mortification  of  the  body, 
and  close  incarceration  of  the  mind  and  heart,  than  by  attracting  the  mind 
and  captivating  the  heart  by  whatsoever  things  are  true  and  lovely  and  of 
good  report.  "Walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the 
flesh."  As  we  study  this  doctrine  we  may  well  say  with  the  prophet,  "The 
thing  is  true,  but  the  time  is  long."  Compare  Antoninus  :  "  Consider  thy 
self  to  be  dead,  and  to  have  completed  thy  life  up  to  the  present  time  :  and 
live  according  to  Nature  the  remainder  which  is  allowed  thee." 

The  student  who  has  mastered  the  teaching  of  the  Answer  on  Justification 
will  be  in  a  position  at  once  to  understand  what  is  meant  by  "righteousness  "  in 
the  text.  In  the  former  case  it  was  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  here  it  is  the 
righteousness  of  the  sanctified  believer.  "  We  have  already  showed  that  there 
are  two  kinds  of  Christian  righteousness  :  the  one  without  us,  which  we  have 
by  imputation  ;  the  other  in  us,  which  consisteth  of  faith,  hope,  charity,  and 
other  Christian  virtues.  .  .  .  God  giveth  us  both  the  one  justice  and  the 
other  :  the  one  by  accepting  us  for  righteous  in  Christ ;  the  other  by  working 
Christian  righteousness  in  us."  (But  see  the  whole  matchless  sermon  in 
Hooker's  Works.  Those  who  have  it  in  their  power  should  master  Cremer's 
article  "  Righteousness  "  in  his  Lexicoti.} 

USES. — I.  From  a  multitude  of  scriptures,  and  from  the  whole  course  of 
the  life  of  sanctification  in  the  Church,  this  sure  deduction  has  been 
drawn  :  the  more  sanctification,  the  more  sense  of  sin.  Before  sancti 
fication  commences  there  is  little  or  no  knowledge  of  sin  ;  but  as  sancti 
fication  deepens  and  spreads  through  the  whole  man,  so  does  the  sense 
of  sin  spread  and  deepen  with  it,  till  this  strange  and  disheartening 
paradox  is  realized  ;  the  less  actual  sin,  the  more  indwelling  sinfulness ; 
and  the  less  outward  transgression,  the  more  inward  corruption.  And 
thus  it  is  that  the  life  and  work  of  sanctification  are  continually  delivering 
over  such  companies  of  submissive  souls  to  the  type  of  doctrine  set 
forth  in  the  Answer  on  Justification.  And  thus  it  is  that  the  great  and 
vital  and  blessed  doctrine  of  imputed  righteousness  has  always  had  such 
blameless  ornaments  and  determined  defenders  in  the  foremost  ranks  of 
scripturally  taught  and  spiritually  sanctified  men. 

2.  "Woe  to  him  that  is  wholly  renewed — that  is,   that  thinks   himself 
to   be  so.     That   man,    without   doubt,  has   never  so   much   as   begun 
to  be  renewed,  nor  did  he  ever  taste  what  it  is  to  be  a  Christian" 
(Luther). 

3.  One   of  Bunyan's   Puritan   contemporaries  expounds    "  prudence "   in 
Eph.  i.  8  of  sanctification.      In  connection  with  this  read  the  dialogue 
between  Prudence  and   Christian   commencing  :    "Do  you  not   think 
sometimes  of  the  country  from  whence  you  came  ?  " 

4.  May  great  sinners  be  sanctified?     Yes,  the  Spirit  of  God  can  sanctify  the 
vilest  heart  (i  Cor.  vi.  n).      And  such  were  some  of  you,  but  ye  are 
washed,  but  ye  are  sanctified  (Flavel). 

5.  "After  the  greatest  mortification,  I  always  find  the  greatest  comfort" 
(Edwards). 


ASSURANCE   OF   GOD'S   LOVE.  91 


QUESTIONS. 

1.  Giue  the  etymology  of  sanctification,  and  explain  the  uses  of  the  word  in  such 
texts  as  Gen.  //'.  3;  Leu.  viii.  30;  Josh.    uii.  13;  1  Pet.  Hi.  15;  Isa.  xxlx.  23;  1  Cor. 
uii.  14;  1  Tim.  iu.  5. 

2.  Master  and  hold  always  in   mind  Cruden's  four  things  in    which  justification 
differs  from  sanctification. 

3.  Distinguish    and   characterize    righteousness   as   it   is  found    in    Answers    10, 
18,  33,  35. 

4.  Sanctifi cation  is  described  under  these  three  striking  and  suggestive  metaphors 
in  Scripture:   (1)   The   casting   of  metal  into  a  mould   (see  Revised  Version),  (2) 
engrafting,  (3)  writing  the  law  upon  the  heart.    Giue  the  passages. 

5.  1  Thess.   v.  23.    A  profoundly  experimental  writer  says  on  this  text :  You  have 
here  expressed  the  subject  of  sanctification  in  its  fullest  extent,  for  it  seems  to 
signify  not  only  totus  homo,  but   totum  hominis.     Explain  and  illustrate  the  dis 
tinction. 

6.  The  same  author,  in   his  Trial  of  a  Christian's  Growth,  John  xu.  1-8,  describes 
sanctification  under  the   two   heads   of  Mortification   and   Vivification.      Giue    the 
etymology  of  these  terms,   and  exhibit  their  agreement  with  the  Scriptures  and  the 
Catechism. 

7.  Explain  and  remember  Pearson's  explanation :  By  virtue  of  this  sanctification 
of  the  sons  of  men,  proceeding  immediately  from  his  office,  the  Spirit  of  God  is 
properly  called  the  Holy  Spirit. 

8.  Explain  the  rule  in  morals :    The  morality  of  the  man  must  precede  the 
morality  of  his  actions. 


Q.  36.  What  are  the  benefits  which  in  this  life  do  accompany  or 
flow  from  justification,  adoption,  and  sanctification  ? 

A.  The  benefits  which  in  this  life  do  accompany  or  flow  from 
justification,  adoption,  and  sanctification,  are,  assurance  of  God's 
love,  peace  of  conscience/ joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost/  increase  of 
grace,h  and  perseverance  therein  to  the  end.1 

f  Rom.  v.  i  :  Therefore,  being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God, 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  Ver.  2.  By  whom  also  we  have  access  by  faith 
into  this  grace  wherein  we  stand,  and  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God.  Ver.  5  : 
And  hope  maketh  not  ashamed  ;  because  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our 
hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  given  unto  us. 

K  Rom.  xiv.  17  :  For  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink  ;  but  righteous 
ness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost. 

h  Prov.  iv.  18  :  But  the  path  of  the  just  is  as  the  shining  light,  that  shineth  more 
and  more  unto  the  perfect  day. 

1  i  John  v.  13  :  That  ye  may  know  that  ye  have  eternal  life,  i  Pet.  i.  5  :  Who 
are  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation,  ready  to  be  revealed 
in  the  last  time. 

The  benefits — Compare  Ps.  ciii.  2-5. 

These  benefits  are  first  mentioned  in  Answer  32,  and  they  are  there  connected 
with  effectual  calling.  What  benefits  do  they  that  are  effectually  called 


92  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

partake  of  in  this  life?  Justification,  adoption,  and  sanctification  are  the 
great  foundation  benefits ;  but  these  being  possessed,  certain  other  benefits 
accompany  or  flow  from  them,  and  some,  though  not  yet  all  of  these,  are  now 
enumerated.  And  the  first  is 

assurance  of  God's  love— Those  students  who  have  any  acquaintance  with 
the  riper  fruits  of  scriptural  and  experimental  truth  will  at  once  recognize  the 
wide  field  that  opens  before  us  at  the  mention  of  the  word  assurance.  The 
Larger  Catechism  condenses  whole  treatises  of  practical  divinity  into  its  8oth 
and  8 1st  Answers.  Can  true  believers  be  infallibly  assured  that  they  are  in  the 
estate  of  grace  ?  and  are  all  true  believers  at  all  times  assured  of  their  present 
being  in  the  estate  of  grace,  and  that  they  shall  be  saved?  The  only  safe 
and  scriptural  way  by  which  a  believer  can  attain  to  assurance  is  by  observing 
in  himself  the  evidences  of  a  saving  change,  by  discerning  in  himself  those 
spiritual  graces  to  which  the  promises  of  eternal  life  are  made.  Assurance 
is  a  scriptural  word.  It  is  found  in  the  sense  of  the  text  in  Isa.  xxxii.  17  : 
"The  effect  of  righteousness  shall  be  quietness  and  assurance  for  ever." 
I  John  iii.  18,  19  :  "My  little  children,  let  us  not  love  in  word,  neither  in 
tqngue  ;  but  in  deed  and  in  truth.  And  hereby  we  know  that  we  are  of  the 
truth,  and  shall  assure  our  hearts  before  Him."  At  the  same  time,  assur 
ance  is  not  of  the  essence  of  faith :  that  is  to  say,  a  man  may  have  a  true 
faith,  and  sufficient  true  faith  to  justify  him  and  finally  save  him,  and  yet 
may  not  have  enough  of  faith  or  of  its  fruits  to  enable  him  to  attain  to 
assurance.  (See  Answer  81,  Larger  Catechism.)  The  late  Canon  Mozley 
in  his  early  work  On  Predestination  speaks  to  this  effect.  The  divine  decree 
may  be  conducting  a  particular  pei'son  by  sure  steps  all  his  life  through  to 
final  glory,  and  yet  he  may  not  be  aware  of  it :  he  may  act  without  much 
contemplating  himself,  or,  if  he  does,  he  may  distrust  himself.  Predestin- 
arians  accordingly,  both  Augustine  and  his  school,  and  modern  ones,  have 
disowned  the  doctrine  of  assurance,  so  far  as  it  is  maintained  in  it,  that 
assurance  is  absolutely  necesssary  for  a  Christian.  In  modern  language,  they 
held  that  "assurance  is  not  of  the  essence  of  faith,"  and  consequently  that  a 
man  might  be  in  a  state  of  grace  and  yet  not  possess  the  assurance  of  it. 
(Students  should  read  Dr.  Cunningham's  essay  on  "Assurance"  in  his 
Reformers.}  Bunyan  in  his  Grace  Abounding  tells  in  his  incomparable  way 
how  the  "assurance  of  God's  love"  manifested  itself  in  his  soul.  "Then  I 
began  to  give  place  to  the  Word,  which,  with  power,  did  over  and  over 
make  this  joyful  sound  within  my  soul,  Thou  art  my  Love>  thou  art  my  Love  ; 
and  nothing  shall  separate  thee  from  my  love  :  and  with  that  Rom.  viii.  39 
came  into  my  mind.  Now  was  my  heart  filled  full  of  comfort  and  hope,  and 
now  I  could  believe  that  my  sins  should  be  forgiven  me  :  yea,  I  was  so  taken 
with  the  love  and  mercy  of  God,  that  I  remember  I  could  not  tell  how  to 
contain  till  I  got  home.  I  thought  I  could  have  spoken  of  His  love  and  of 
His  mercy  to  me,  even  to  the  very  crows  that  sat  upon  the  ploughed  land 
before  me,  had  they  been  capable  to  have  understood  me." 

peace  of  conscience — Every  man's  conscience  is  a  kind  of  court  of  justice  ; 
a  court  that  has  been  set  up  by  the  authority  and  letters  patent  of  our  Divine 
Sovereign  ;  a  court  that  never  rises,  and  never  goes  on  circuit.  It  sits  in  the 
same  place  summer  and  winter,  daylight  and  darkness.  A  strange  and  an 
awful  court,  surpassingly  strange  in  this,  that  each  man  among  us  holds  all 
its  offices;  for  every  man  is  judge,  witness,  and  accused  in  the  inner  house  of 
his  own  heart.  "The  conscience  is  in  a  man  what  the  snout  is  in  a  bear, 


JOY   IN   THE   HOLY   GHOST.  93 

and  the  mouth  in  a  horse,  a  tender  part  to  tame  them  by.  Conscience 
is  acutely  sensible  to  God's  wrath,  and  hell-fire  could  not  take  hold  of  the 
soul  but  at  this  corner.  Conscience  is  the  channel  by  which  the  streams 
of  fire  and  brimstone  enter  the  soul.  Conscience,  accordingly,  hath  its 
fullest  dominion  in  hell,  and  will  be  at  the  highest  of  its  power  there  " 
(Goodwin). 

"  O  Conscience,  who  can  stand  against  thy  power? 
Endure  thy  gripes  and  agonies  one  hour  ? 
Stone,  gout,  strappado,  racks,  whatever  is 
Dreadful  to  sense,  are  only  toys  to  this. 
No  pleasures,  riches,  honours,  friends,  can  tell 
How  to  give  ease  to  this,  'tis  like  to  hell." — FLAVEL. 

How  great  a  benefit  then  must  "peace  of  conscience"  be!  And  how 
important  to  learn  early  how  it  is  to  be  attained  and  preserved  !  And  how 
essential  that  we  be  taught  to  hold  clear  scriptural  truth  on  this  all-important 
subject !  This  distinctively  evangelical  subject  has  never  had  a  fuller,  or  clearer, 
or  more  suggestive  preacher  than  Dr.  Thomas  Goodwin,  whose  name  occurs 
so  often  in  these  pages.  Writing  on  this  subject  in  his  book  on  The  Holy 
Ghost,  he  says:  "The  Scripture  knows  no  such  phrase  as  'peace  of  con 
science.'  It  is  indeed  peace  of  conscience  subjectively,  conscience  being  the 
principle  as  to  which  peace  is  spoken.  But  when  it  is  spoken,  it  is  so  spoken 
as  that  it  is  the  peace  of  God,  and  not  peace  with  God  only.  I  will  hear 
what  God  the  Lord  will  speak  ;  for  He  will  speak  peace  to  His  people  and 
to  His  saints."  (See  the  whole  passage,  Book  vii.  chap,  xii.) 

joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost — This  is  a  scriptural  expression.  In  Rom.  xiv.  17, 
we  read  of  "righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  The 
Holy  Ghost  is  that  Divine  Person  who  enters  our  hearts  and  makes  them 
His  home  and  His  temple.  Now  the  heart  is  the  proper  seat  of  joy,  as  the 
conscience  is  of  peace ;  and  as  all  our  solid  peace  comes  to  us  from  God 
through  Christ,  so  all  holy  joy  comes  when  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad 
in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  given  unto  us.  We  cannot  indeed 
say  with  the  Ephesian  converts  that  "  we  have  not  so  much  as  heard  whether 
there  be  any  Holy  Ghost,"  but  few  have  attained  to  much  of  his  joy.  We 
continually  vex  and  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  we  do  not  aright  and  earnestly 
pray,  "Take  not  Thy  Holy  Spirit  from  me  ;  restore  to  me  the  joy  of  Thy 
salvation."  Hopeful,  describing  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  his  heart  to 
Christian,  says:  "Now  was  my  heart  full  of  joy,  mine  eyes  full  of  tears, 
and  mine  affections  running  over  with  love  to  the  name,  people,  and  ways 
of  Jesus  Christ.  ...  It  made  me  love  a  holy  life,  and  long  to  do  something 
for  the  honour  and  glory  of  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  yea,  I  thought  that 
had  I  now  a  hundred  gallons  of  blood  in  my  body,  I  could  spill  it  all  for  the 
sake  of  the  Lord  Jesus." 

Cowper,  who  tasted  too  little  of  that  joy,  thus  sings  of  it  :— 

"  There  is  a  paradise  that  bears 
No  forfeiture,  and  of  its  fruits  He  sends 
Large  prelibations  oft  to  saints  below." 

increase  of  grace — Our  salvation  is  of  grace,  and  it  is  all  of  grace.  It 
begins  in  grace,  and  it  is  built  up  in  grace,  and  the  headstone  is  brought  out 
with  shoutings  of  Grace,  grace  unto  it.  "  By  grace  ye  are  saved,  not  of  works, 
lest  any  man  should  boast."  There  are  few  finer  things  in  a  book  full  of  good 
things  than  when  the  dreamer  describes  Old  Honest's  character,  and  then 


94  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A    COMMENTARY. 

tells  us  of  his  passage  of  the  river.  "  Mr.  Honest  in  his  lifetime  had  spoken 
to  one  Good  Conscience  to  meet  him  there,  the  which  he  also  did,  and  lent 
him  his  hand,  and  so  helped  him  over.  The  last  words  of  Mr.  Honest  were, 
Grace  reigns.  So  he  left  the  world." 

Pauline,  Augustinian,  and  Calvinistic  divines,  of  which  John  Bunyan  was 
one  of  the  best,  have  all  conspired  to  magnify  the  grace  of  God  in  the  salva 
tion  of  men.  And  this  indeed  is  the  distinguishing  mark  of  their  theology, 
that  they  attribute  all  our  salvation  in  all  its  parts  to  the  free  grace  of  God. 
Thus  they  make  much  of  prcvenicnt  grace,  meaning  by  that,  as  the  etymology 
of  the  word  teaches,  the  grace  that  goes  before  or  precedes  and  excites 
all  our  efforts  after  or  interest  in  divine  things.  The  second  stage  in  the 
growth  of  grace  is  when  that  grace  becomes  internally  and  effectually  opera 
tive.  (See  Answers  30,  31.)  And  lastly,  co-operating  or  habitual  grace  is  the 
name  given  to  that  indwelling  and  assistance  of  the  Holy  Ghost  whereby  all 
that  has  been  attained  in  grace  is  secured,  and  new  progress  is  made  from 
grace  to  grace.  These  three  great  stages  have  of  course  all  manner  of  modi 
fications  and  fluctuations  in  the  individual  soul,  till  it  is  made  a  partaker  of 
the  grace  that  is  to  be  brought  to  it  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ. 

and  perseverance  therein  to  the  end.  Stedfastness,  constancy,  endurance, 
progress,  final  perseverance.  This  is  the  crowning  "benefit"  we  receive 
"in  this  life."  And  of  all  the  graces,  it  is  the  most  precious,  because  it  is 
the  one  which  makes  all  the  others  of  lasting  value  "  The  only  sure  sign 
that  any  man  is  one  of  the  elect  is  his  perseverance  in  the  Christian  life  ;  for 
he  is  elected  to  holiness  as  well  as  happiness.  Perseverance,  like  faith,  is  the 
gift  of  God,  and  Augustine  denominates  it  donum  perseverantia;,  the  gift  or 
grace  of  perseverance  "  (Shedd). 

The  Larger  Catechism  gathers  up  the  teaching  of  Scripture  on  this  subject 
with  its  usual  clearness  and  fulness:  "True  believers,  by  reason  of  the 
unchangeable  love  of  God,  and  His  decree  and  covenant  to  give  them 
perseverance,  their  inseparable  union  with  Christ,  His  continual  intercession 
for  them,  and  the  Spirit  and  seed  of  God  abiding  in  them,  can  neither  totally 
nor  finally  fall  away  from  a  state  of  grace,  but  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God 
through  faith  unto  salvation."  At  the  same  time  it  is  the  believer  who  per 
severes,  and  not  another  for  him.  He  must  work  out  his  own  salvation. 
He  must  endure,  and  press  on,  and  remain  stedfast.  He  must  resist  unto 
blood,  striving  against  sin.  (See  Evangelist's  counsels  to  Christian  and 
Faithful  when  they  were  approaching  the  town  of  Vanity.)  The  greatest 
Avork  in  our  language  on  this  subject  is  John  Owen's  Perseverance  of  the 
Saints.  It  is  sadly  disfigured  in  form  through  its  polemical  character,  but 
it  is  a  great  work,  and  will  well  repay  any  man  who  reads  it.  (See  also 
Hooker's  Sermon  on  the  Certainty  and  Perpetuity  of  Faith  in  the  Elect,  in 
•which  the  style  is  all  but  worthy  of  the  subject. ) 

"  I  have  seen 

The  thorn  frown  rudely  all  the  winter  long, 
And  after  bear  the  rose  upon  its  top  ; 
And  bark,  that  all  the  way  across  the  sea 
Ran  straight  and  speedy,  perish  at  the  last, 
E'en  in  the  haven's  mouth." — DANTE. 

'"  One  leak  will  sink  a  ship,  and  one  sin  will  destroy  a  sinner  "  (Bunyan). 
**'  The  evening  praises  the  day,  and  the  chief  grace  of  the  theatre  is  the  last 
scene.  Be  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life " 
^Joseph  Hall). 


PERSEVERANCE.  95 

USES. — i.  A  believer  should  have  his  best  benefits  in  daily  recollection. 
Blessed  be  the  Lord  who  daily  loadeth  us  with  benefits.  They  are  new 
every  morning  :  great  is  Thy  faithfulness. 

2.  "  The  technicalities  of  the  controversy  are  somewhat  altered,  while  its 
substance   remains  the   same.      The   grave  question   still   is,  as  it   has 
always  been,   Is  it  practicable,   obligatory,   or  expedient  that  believers 
should  be  assured  of  their  justification  and  salvation  ?  .   .   .  We  believe 
that  the  prevailing  practical  disregard  of  the  privilege  and  duty  of  having 
assurance,   is,  to  no  inconsiderable  extent,  at  once  the  cause  and  the 
effect  of  the  low  state  of  vital  religion  amongst  us, — one  main  reason 
why  there  is  so  little  of  real  communion  with  God  as  our  reconciled 
Father,  and  so  little  of  real,  hearty  devotedness  to  His  cause  and  service  " 
(Dr.  Cunningham). 

3.  "  When  we  want  the  faith  of  assurance,  we  must  live  by  the  faith  of 
adherence  "  (Matthew  Henry). 

4.  "Serve  your  God  day  and  night  faithfully,  walk  humbly;  there  is  a 
promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  come  and  fill  your  hearts  with  joy  un 
speakable  and  glorious,  to  rear  you  up  to  the  day  of  redemption.     Sue 
this  promise  out,   wait  for   it,   rest  not  in  believing  only,   rest   not  in 
assurance  by  graces   only ;    there  is  a   further   assurance   to   be   had " 
(Goodwin). 

5.  The  use  and  intent  of  the  whole  of  the  First  Epistle  of  John  is  to  lead; 
the  soul  to  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.     "  These  things  write  we  unto  you, 
that  your  joy  may  be  full."     Keep  conscience  well  enlightened  as  to  the 
alone  ground  of  its  peace.     (See  Answers  33,  86,  87.) 

6.  Ps.  cxxxviii.   8,  a;    "The   Lord   will    perfect   that   which   concerneth 
me." 

7.  Learn  to  think  of  your  hearts  as  the  true  and  only  home  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  trace  all  holy  and  happy  affections  to  His  indwelling,  and  to- 
the  effusions  of  His  grace. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Deriue  benefit.    Name  the  sources  of  the  benefits  enumerated  in  Answer  36.    Name' 
also  the  several  streams  that  are  said  to  flow  from  those  sources.    So  far  as  the  case 
admits,  trace  each  stream  to  its  proper  source  or  sources,  and  illustrate  the  whole 
from  Scripture. 

2.  Explain  what  is  meant  by  the  position :  Assurance  is  not  of   the  essence  of 
faith. 

3.  Explain  what  is  meant  by  the  evidential,  judicial,  and  prophetic  functions  of 
conscience,  and  illustrate  from  Scripture. 

4.  The  following  expressions  are  found  in  the  Scriptures  applied  to  the  conscience  :• 
good,  pure,  purged,  void  of  offence,  weak,  evil,  defiled,  seared.    Explain. 

5.  What  is  meant  by  Giant  Despair  falling  into  fits  in  sunshiny  weather  ? 

6.  In  some  cases  perseverance  is  more  difiicult  than  conversion.     What  does 
Manton  mean  to  teach  in  saying  so  ? 

7.  Explain  and  illustrate  from  Scripture  the  saying  of  St.  Bernard :  Perseverance 
Is  tho  only  one  of  all  the  virtues  that  is  crowned. 

8.  Explain  Bengel's  remark  on  John  ui.  70 :  There  is  therefore  a  kind  of  election- 
from  which  one  may  fall  away.    (See  Answer  20.)    Explain  and  reconcile. 


9 6  THE    SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

Q.  37.    What  benefits  do  believers  receive  from  Christ  at  death  ? 

A.  The  souls  of  believers  are  at  their  death  made  perfect  in 
holiness*,!  and  do  immediately  pass  into  glory  ;k  and  their  bodies, 
being  still  united  to  Christ,1  do  rest  in  their  graves"1  till  the 
resurrection.11 

J  Heb.  xii.  23  :  The  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect. 

k  2  Cor.  v.  i :  If  our  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  were  dissolved,  we  have  a 
building  of  God,  an  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens.  Ver.  6  : 
Therefore  we  are  always  confident,  knowing  that,  whilst  we  are  at  home  in  the 
body,  we  are  absent  from  the  Lord  ;  Ver.  8 :  Willing  rather  to  be  absent  from 
the  body,  and  to  be  present  with  the  Lord.  Phil.  i.  23  :  For  I  am  in  a  strait 
betwixt  two,  having  a  desire  to  depart,  and  to  be  with  Christ.  Luke  xxiii.  43 : 
And  Jesus  said  unto  him,  Verily  I  say  unto  thee,  To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in 
paradise. 

1  i  Thess.  iv.  14  :  .  .  .  them  also  which  sleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  him. 

m  Isa.  Ivii.  2 :  .  .  .  they  shall  rest  in  their  beds  .  .  . 

n  Job  xix.  26  :  And  though  after  my  skin  worms  destroy  this  body,  yet  in  my 
flesh  shall  I  see  God  ;  Ver.  27  :  Whom  I  shall  see  for  myself,  and  mine  eyes  shall 
behold,  and  not  another  ;  though  my  reins  be  consumed  within  me. 

Questions  37  and  38  occupy  the  department  of  theology  which  is  desig 
nated  Eschatology^  or  the  doctrine  of  the  Last  Things.  The  benefits  that 
the  effectually  called  partake  of  in  this  life  having  been  set  forth  in  Questions 
32-36,  the  Catechism  now  passes  on  to  deal  with  the  benefits  believers 
receive  at  death. 

The  souls  of  believers  are  at  their  death  made  perfect  in  holiness — 
While  teaching  the  doctrine  of  the  word  of  God  on  the  matter  in  hand,  this 
Answer  is  so  drawn  as  to  deny  the  Romish  doctrine  of  a  purgatorial  state 
between  death  and  resurrection.  The  Under  world  of  the  Fathers  and  the 
Purgatory  of  the  Papists  are  both  opposed  by  the  teaching  of  the  Catechism. 
Were  we  only  to  employ  natural  reason  in  dealing  with  such  a  mysterious 
matter,  we  might  well  be  staggered  at  the  assertion  that  what  has  taken  so 
long  time  to  make  so  little  progress,  should  be  in  a  moment  made  perfect ; 
that  our  growth  in  holiness,  which  has  been  so  slow  and  fitful,  should  all  at 
once  leap  into  immediate  and  everlasting  perfection.  But  in  this  whole 
region  of  things,  we  must  go  by  the  word  of  God  alone,  and  its  teaching  all 
points  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Reformed  Churches,  that  "the  souls  of  believers 
are  at  their  death  made  perfect  in  holiness,  and  do  immediately  pass  into 
glory."  Nor  are  we  without  actual  examples  in  Scripture  of  great  and  sudden 
•changes  wrought  in  the  spiritual  state  of  men  by  the  power  and  grace  of 
•God  analogous,  at  least,  to  what  is  here  promised  to  believers  at  their  death. 
The  immense  and  immediate  transformation  that  the  disciples  underwent  on 
'the  clay  of  Pentecost,  was,  if  not  equal,  at  least  analogous  and  initial  to  that 
-consummating  change  they  underwent  at  the  hour  of  death.  Paul  also 
"underwent  a  more  radical  change  at  the  gate  of  Damascus  than  even  that 
which  he  passed  through  at  his  abundant  entrance  into  glory,  "when,  like  a 
northern  midnight,  the  rose  of  evening  became  suddenly  and  silently  the  rose 
of  dawn."  At  the  same  time  there  is  room  both  in  Scripture  and  Protestant 
•doctrine  for  the  observation  of  Calvin:  "Although  those  who  have  been 
/reed  from  the  mortal  body  do  no  longer  contend  with  the  lusts  of  the  flesh, 


THE   BENEFITS    BELIEVERS    RECEIVE   AT   DEATH.  97 

and  are,  as  the  expression  is,  beyond  the  reach  of  a  single  dart,  yet  there 
will  be  no  absurdity  in  speaking  of  them  as  in  the  way  of  advancement,  inas 
much  as  they  have  not  yet  reached  the  point  at  which  they  aspire, — they  do 
not  enjoy  the  felicity  and  glory  which  they  have  hoped  for,  and,  in  fine,  the 
day  has  not  yet  shone  which  is  to  discover  the  treasures  which  lie  hid  in  hope. 
And  in  truth,  when  hope  is  spoken  of,  our  eyes  must  always  be  directed 
forward  to  a  blessed  resurrection  as  the  great  object  in  view." 

and  do  immediately  pass  into  glory — "  Their  souls  immediately  return 
to  God  who  gave  them.  .  .  .  Besides  the  highest  heavens  and  hell,  be 
sides  these  two  places  for  souls  separated  from  their  bodies,  the  Scripture 
acknowledged!  none  "  (Confession,  chap,  xxxii.). 

and  their  bodies  being  still  united  to  Christ— The  apostle,  arguing 
against  sensuality  in  his  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  says  :  "  Know  ye 
not  that  your  bodies  are  the  members  of  Christ  ? "  and  it  is  his  doctrine  in 
all  his  epistles  that  Christ  has  redeemed  our  whole  man,  and  that  we  are 
His,  body,  soul,  and  spirit.  The  believer  is  united  in  regeneration  to  Christ, 
soul  and  body,  and  soul  and  body  are  both  henceforth  in  Christ's  keeping  ; 
and  He  will  present  both  without  spot  or  blemish  at  the  great  day.  It  is  not 
the  soul,  but  the  body,  that  "sleeps  in  Jesus."  Their  very  dust  to  Him  is 
dear. 

" '  The  Fathers  are  in  dust,  yet  live  to  God,' 
So  says  the  Truth  ;  as  if  the  motionless  cl:iy 
Still  held  the  seeds  of  life  beneath  the  sod, 
Smouldering  and  struggling  till  the  judgment-day. 
Sophist  may  urge  his  cunning  test,  and  deem 
That  they  are  earth  ;  but  they  are  heavenly  shrines." — NEWMAN. 

"  God,  my  Redeemer  lives, 
And  often  from  the  skies 
Looks  down  and  watches  all  my  dust, 
Till  He  shall  bid  it  rise."— WATTS. 

do  rest  in  their  graves  till  the  resurrection.  Rest  is  one  of  the  sweetest 
words  in  the  language  of  men,  and  the  rest  that  remaineth  for  the  weary  body 
is  only  a  rest  as  in  sleep  before  the  glorious  awakening.  "  This  body  shall 
not  be  buried,  but  sown,"  sown  as  seed  to  spring  up  to  eternal  life. 

"  Death,  thou  wast  once  an  uncouth,  hideous  thing: 
But  since  our  Saviour's  death 
Has  put  some  blood  into  thy  face, 
Thou  hast  grown  sure  a  thing  to  be  desired 
And  full  of  grace." — GEORGE  HERBERT. 

USES. — I.  If  all  this  is  so,  then  death,  as  Herbert  says,  is  a  thing  to  be 
desired,  as  it  would  be  did  our  faith  and  hope  aright  realize  it.  A 
gracious  soul  should  live  in  a  constant  and  hopeful  outlook  for  the 
approach  of  such  an  awful  yet  glorious  change. 

2.  When  death  comes,   and  it  may  come  any  moment,   all  our  gracious 
opportunities  will  be  for  ever  past.     And  the  thought  of  this  ought  to 
make  death  to  the  youngest  ever  imminent,  just  as  Scripture,  because  of 
the  transcendent  importance  of  Christ's  coming,  always  speaks  of  it  as 
just  at  hand. 

3.  What  is  the  fourth  inference  ?      Saints  should  not  fear  death.      What 
is  the  last  inference  ?     Employ  your  bodies  for  good  now  (Flavel). 

QUESTION. 

Explain  what  is  meant  by  the  following :  The  intermediate  state ;  Hades  ;  Limbus 
Patrum ;  Purgatory ;  Paradise  ;  and  compare  with  teaching  of  Catechism 

G 


98  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

Q.  38.  What  benefits  do  believers  receive  from  Christ  at  the 
resurrection  ? 

A.  At  the  resurrection,  believers  being  raised  up  in  glory,0 
shall  be  openly  acknowledged  and  acquitted  in  the  day  of 
judgment,p  and  made  perfectly  blessed  in  the  full  enjoying  of 
God  *  to  all  eternity.' 

0  i  Cor.  xv.  43  :  It  is  raised  in  glory  .  .  . 

P  Matt.  xxv.  23  :  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant ;  thou  hast  been  faithful 
over  a  few  things,  I  will  make  thee  ruler  over  many  things  :  enter  thou  into  the 
joy  of  thy  lord.  Matt.  x.  32  :  Whosoever  therefore  shall  confess  me  before  men, 
him  will  I  confess  also  before  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven. 

1  i  John  iii.  2 :  Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God  ;  and  it  doth  not  yet 
appear  what  we  shall  be  :  but  we  know  that,  when  he  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like 
him  ;  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is.     i  Cor.  xiii.  12 :  For  now  we  see  through  a 
glass,  darkly  ;  but  then  face  to  face  :  now  I  know  in  part ;  but  then  shall  I  know 
even  as  also  I  am  known. 

r  i  Thess.  iv.  17 :  .  .  .  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord. 

At  the  resurrection — The  resurrection  of  the  dead  is  exclusively  a  doctrine 
of  the  word  of  God.  It  nowhere  appears  in  the  religions  of  paganism.  That 
the  soul  should  continue  to  live  after  death  was  the  faith  and  hope  of  many 
of  the  best  men  in  heathendom  ;  but  that  there  should  be  a  resurrection  of 
the  body,  and  a  reunion  of  soul  and  body  for  ever,  this  is  a  doctrine  derived 
wholly  from  the  word  of  God.  The  Athenians  in  Paul's  day  believed  in  the 
existence  of  God.  They  raised  no  opposition  even  when  he  preached  the 
unity,  spirituality,  providence,  and  fatherhood  of  God ;  but  when  he  went 
on  from  these  things  to  preach  Jesus  and  the  resurrection,  that  was  a  ' '  new 
doctrine  "  to  them,  and  some  mocked,  though  others  said,  We  will  hear  thee 
again  of  this  matter. 

There  is  nothing  taught  in  the  text  touching  the  resurrection  of  unbelievers, 
because  the  Catechism  is  engaged  in  tracing  the  benefits  that  ' '  believers  " 
receive  from  Christ ;  and  though  all  the  dead  shall  rise  again,  all  shall  not 
"attain  to  the  resurrection"  set  forth  in  the  text. 

believers  being  raised  up  in  glory — This  is  the  last  time  "believers" 
shall  bear  that  name.  From  the  day  of  their  effectual  calling  to  the  day  of 
their  resurrection  they  have  been  "believers,"  but  after  their  resurrection  there 
is  no  more  room  for  faith ;  then  and  thereafter  they  shall  know  even  as  they 
are  known.  At  the  resurrection  Christ  shall  change  their  vile  body,  that  it  may 
be  fashioned  like  unto  His  glorious  body.  But  what  that  glory  shall  consist 
in  we  cannot  in  this  life  tell ;  we  are  "believers  "  in  the  resurrection  and  the 
resurrection  life.  "Therefore  some  of  our  divines  say  that  our  Saviour  Christ 
did  not  simply  merit  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  for  that  apart  from  Him 
they  must  have  risen  again  and  been  brought  to  judgment :  but  these  glorious 
qualifications  the  saints  have  at  the  resurrection,  which  is  the  preparation  to 
the  glory  in  heaven — these  He  merited,  this  some  divines  say  "  (Goodwin). 

shall  be  openly  acknowledged  and  acquitted  in  the  day  of  judgment — 

God  had  secretly  acknowledged  and  acquitted  them  on  the  day  of  their  first 
justification.  But  both  their  faith  in  Christ  and  their  acceptance  before  God 
had  been  hidden  with  Christ  in  God.  The  whole  transaction  of  their 
renewal,  union  to  Christ,  pardon,  and  acceptance  was  unknown  to  the  world 


THE   RESURRECTION.  99 

in  which  they  dwelt :  in  many  cases  true  believers  themselves  had  never  come 
to  a  clear  assurance  that  they  possessed  these  saving  benefits.  But  all  that 
will  then  be  made  manifest  both  to  themselves  and  to  all  men.  What  had 
been  spoken  in  secret  shall  then  be  told  from  the  house-tops. 

"Christ  hath  not  all  His  members  up  to  Him,  nor  are  they  out  of  all 
danger,  as  I  may  so  express  it ;  for  though  at  the  day  of  judgment  to  the 
saints  there  is  no  real  danger,  yet  they  are  to  give  an  account  of  their  actions, 
and  there  remaineth  a  final  sentence  to  be  pronounced  upon  them  by  the 
Great  Judge,  and  in  that  sense  there  is  a  forgiveness  of  sins  then  ;  therefore 
Paul  prayeth  that  he  may  find  mercy  at  that  day  "  (Goodwin). 

"JESUS,  Thy  blood  and  righteousness 
My  beauty  are,  my  glorious  dress  : 
'Midst  flaming  worlds  in  these  arrayed, 
With  joy  shall  I  lift  up  my  head. 

"  Bold  shall  I  stand  in  that  great  day : 
For  who  aught  to  my  charge  shall  lay  ? 
Fully,  through  these,  absolved  I  am 
From  sin  and  fear,  from  guilt  and  shame." 

made  perfectly  blessed — 

"  It  may  not  be, 

That  one,  who  looks  upon  that  light,  can  turn 
To  other  objects,  willingly,  his  view. 
For  all  the  good,  that  will  may  covet,  there 
Is  summ'd  ;  and  all,  elsewhere  defective  found, 
Complete." — Paradise.     (See  the  whole  canto,  xxxiii.) 

See  also  the  talk  that  the  Shining  Ones  held  with  the  pilgrims  about  the  glory 
of  the  place. 

in  the  full  enjoying  of  God — "But  especially  in  the  immediate  vision  and 
fruition  of  God  the  Father,  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to 
all  eternity  "  (Larger  Catechism).  "  To  sit  down  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and 
Jacob  was  the  phraseology  of  the  Old  Testament,  but  to  sit  down  with  Us — 
with  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost — this  is  Christ's  language,  this  is  New 
Testament  language  "  (Goodwin). 

"Man's  chief  end"  is  now  attained.  (See  Question  I.)  The  Scriptures 
constantly  teach  that  man's  only  true  happiness  is  in  God,  and  that  his  full 
happiness  in  God  cannot  be  attained  in  this  life,  but  that  believing  men  have 
that  happiness  assured  to  them  in  the  life  to  come.  Commenting  on  John 
xiv.  6,  Godet  says:  "Jesus  here  substitutes  the  Father  for  the  Father's 
house.  For  it  is  not  in  heaven  that  we  are  to  find  God,  but  in  God  that  we 
are  to  find  heaven." 

to  all  eternity.  f<  When  time  and  sin  together  cease."  "  Both  a  prophet 
and  an  apostle  join  in  teaching  us  that  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor 
man's  heart  conceived,  what  God  has  prepared  for  those  that  love  Him. 
When  the  bodies  of  the  just  rise  at  the  general  resurrection,  with  their  senses 
spiritualized  and  rendered  capable  of  pleasures  which  do  not  fall  within  their 
province  now,  and  with  perhaps  many  new  senses  developed  in  the  immortal 
body  which  were  unknown  in  its  mortal  days,  the  pure  pleasures  of  their 
glorified  senses  must  be  something  quite  beyond  the  power  of  our  imagination 
to  picture  to  itself"  (Faber). 

USES. — I.   "As  Christ  would  have  us  to  be  certainly  persuaded  that  there 
shall  be  a  day  of  judgment,  both  to  deter  all  men  from  sin,  and  for  the 


IOD          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM    WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

greater  consolation  of  the  godly  in  their  adversity ;  so  will  He  have  that 
day  unknown  to  men,  that  they  may  shake  off  all  carnal  security,  and  be 
always  watchful,  because  they  know  not  at  what  hour  the  Lord  will 
come  :  and  may  be  ever  prepared  to  say,  Come,  Lord  Jesus,  come 
quickly.  Amen  "  (Confession). 

2.  Luther  warns  us:  "The  flesh  ever  seeks  to  be  glorified  before  it  is 
crucified  :  exalted  before  it  is  abased." 

3.  It  is  often  ignorantly  and  frivolously  charged  against  Christian  men  that 
it  is  selfish  in  them  to  seek  heaven  and  glory  for  their  own  souls  ;  but  no 
man  who  is  truly  seeking  salvation  will  be  moved  by  that  accusation. 
When  men  really  begin  to  seek  their  salvation,  and  to  turn  their  faces  to 
the  glory  of  heaven,  then  it  is  that  all  selfish  and  ignoble  desires  receive 
their  death-blow.     It  is  not  selfish,  surely,  for  the  diseased  to  seek  healing, 
or  the  hungry  food,  or  the  prodigal  his  father's  house.     So  far  from  this 
being  a  sign  that  the  heart  is  selfish,  there  is  no  surer  sign  that  it  is  being 
sanctified. 

4.  '•'Pliable.  The  hearing  of  all  this  is  enough  to  ravish  one's  heart ;  but 
are  these  things  to  be  enjoyed  ?     How  shall  we  get  to  be  sharers  hereof? 

"  Christian.  The  Lord,  the  Governor  of  the  country,  hath  recorded 
that  in  this  book  ;  the  substance  of  which  is,  If  we  be  truly  willing  to 
have  it,  He  will  bestow  it  upon  us  freely." 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Give  New  Testament  passages  where  the  Resurrection  life  is  called  a  Regenera 
tion,  a  Redemption,  and  a  Restitution,  and  explain  these  terms  when  so  applied. 

2.  Reconcile  acquitted  in  the  text  with  the  teaching  of  Answer  33. 


HAVING  SEEN  WHAT  THE  SCRIPTURES  PRINCIPALLY  TEACH  US  TO  BELIEVE 
CONCERNING  GOD,  IT  FOLLOWS  TO  CONSIDER  WHAT  THEY  REQUIRE 
AS  THE  DUTY  OF  MAN. 

Q.  39.    What  is  the  duty  which  God  requireth  of  man  ? 
A.  The  duty  which  God  requireth  of  man,  is  obedience  to  his 
revealed  will.8 

»  Micah  vi.  8  :  He  hath  showed  thee,  O  man,  what  is  good  ;  and  what  doth  the 
Lord  require  of  thee,  but  to  do  justly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly 
\vith  thy  God  ?  i  Sam.  xv.  22  :  And  Samuel  said,  Hath  the  Lord  as  great  delight 
in  burnt-offerings  and  sacrifices,  as  in  obeying  the  voice  of  the  Lord  ?  Behold,  to 
obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and  to  hearken  than  the  fat  of  rams. 

The  duty  which  God  requireth  of  man — Duty,  what  is  due,  what  is  owed 
as  a  debt :  that  which  we  ought  to  do.  In  seeing  anything  to  be  right,  we 
see  at  the  same  time  that  it  is  our  duty  to  do  it.  Duty  is  that  act,  or  word, 
or  thought,  or  feeling,  or  wish  to  which  a  man  is  bound.  The  following  is 
Kant's  celebrated  apostrophe:  "  DUTY  !  thou  great,  thou  exalted  name  I 
Wondrous  thought,  that  workest  neither  by  fond  insinuation,  flattery,  nor 
any  threat,  but  merely  by  holding  up  thy  naked  law  in  the  soul,  and  so 
extorting  for  thyself  always  reverence,  if  not  always  obedience, — before  whom 
all  appetites  are  dumb,  however  secretly  they  rebel, — whence  thy  original  ? 
and  where  find  we  the  root  of  thy  august  descent,  thus  loftily  disclaiming  all 
kindred  with  appetite  and  want  ?  To  be  in  like  manner  descended  from 


THE   DUTY   WHICH   GOD   REQUIRETH   OF   MAN.  IO1 

which  root  is  the  unchanging  condition  of  that  worth  which  mankind  can 
alone  claim  for  themselves." 

obedience  to  his  revealed  will.  To  reveal  signifies  to  make  known  what 
has  hitherto  been  concealed.  At  its  root  the  word  means  to  draw  back  a 
veil.  The  name  of  the  last  book  of  the  New  Testament,  called  in  Greek  the 
Apocalypse,  has  the  same  root  and  meaning.  It  contains  the  Revelation 
which  God  gave  to  Jesus  Christ,  that  He  might  again  discover  it  to  John, 
and  through  John  to  the  Church.  The  word  is  also  used  in  a  wider  sense 
of  the  whole  of  Scripture,  or  of  that  economy  of  gracious  manifestation  and 
interposition  of  which  Scripture  is  the  written  record.  Hence  the  distinction, 
Nature  and  Revelation. 

God's  will  is  for  many  purposes  sufficiently  revealed  to  us  in  the  constitu 
tion  of  nature,  and  in  the  experiences  of  life.  Prior  to  and  apart  from 
Scripture,  there  is  a  binding  revelation  of  God  written  on  every  man's 
conscience  and  heart.  And  hence  Paul  teaches  that  the  very  heathen  are  a 
law  unto  themselves.  Hooker  and  Butler  have  made  the  thought  familiar 
to  us,  that  revelation  itself,  in  many  of  its  parts,  is  but  a  republication  and 
expansion  of  the  law  of  Nature.  At  the  same  time,  and  after  the  fullest 
recognition  has  been  taken,  and  the  frankest  acknowledgment  made  of  all 
that  nature  and  experience  can  teach  to  man,  there  is  still  a  vast  field  left 
unoccupied  that  only  revelation  can  fill.  Let  the  student  consider  how  much 
nature  or  experience  could  have  taught  him  of  the  transcendently  important 
truths  the  first  half  of  the  Catechism  has  set  before  him  :  as  also  how  much 
the  Catechism  rests  on  Scripture  in  what  it  has  still  to  teach.  And  as 
Hooker  and  Butler  have  been  referred  to  for  the  claim  they  advance  for  a 
recognition  of  the  revealing  functions  of  nature  and  experience,  so  may  they 
be  profitably  studied  for  their  splendid  exhibition  of  the  superior  sphere  and 
service  of  Revelation.  (See  especially  the  latter  writer  on  the  nature  of 
Revelation  and  the  necessity  for  it  in  his  Analogy,  Part  ii.  chap,  i.) 

"  The  secret  things  belong  unto  the  Lord  our  God  ;  but  those  things  which 
are  revealed  belong  unto  us,  and  to  our  children  for  ever,  that  we  may  do  all 
the  words  of  this  law  "  (Deut.  xxix.  29). 

From  this  and  kindred  scriptures  divines  have  learned  to  speak  of  God's 
will  as  decretive  and  preceptive,  absolute  and  conditional.  God's  decretive 
will  embraces  His  eternal  purposes.  (See  Answer  7.)  Which  will,  so  far  as 
it  is  revealed,  is  to  be  believed  and  reverenced,  but  His  preceptive  will  is  to 
be  received  and  obeyed.  His  preceptive  will  is  the  rule  of  life  to  us. 
(Answer  2.)  As  to  how  our  duties  enlarge  and  increase  with  the  growth  of 
revelation,  see  Butler,  ii.  I. 

USES. — i.  "  If  I  were  asked  in  what  book  a  clear  outline  of  the  Christian 
faith  might  be  found  and  studied,  I  would  at  once  say,  '  In  the  first 
thirty-eight  Questions  of  the  Assembly's  Shorter  Catechism.'  But  if  I 
were  asked  for  a  practical  guide,  to  lead  men  to  Christ,  and  to  train 
them  to  holiness,  I  would  say,  '  Begin  at  the  thirty-ninth  Question,  and 
be  guided  with  those  that  follow  onward  to  the  end ' "  (Macfarlan's 
Preface  to  Paterson). 

2.  "An  orthodox  faith  and  an  obedient  life  is  the  whole  duty  of  man" 
(Newman). 

3.  "  The   standard   of  right   and   wrong    is    eternal    in    the    heavens, — 
unchangeably  one  and  the  same.      But  here  on  earth  it  is  perpetually 
variable,  — it   is  one  in  one  age  or  nation,  another  in  another.     Every 


IO2  THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

profession  has  its  conventional  morality,  current  nowhere  else.  .  .  . 
And  in  all  these  cases  the  temptation  is  to  live  content  with  the  standard 
of  a  man's  own  profession  or  society  ;  and  this  is  the  real  difference 
between  the  worldly  man  and  the  religious  man.  He  is  the  worldling 
who  lives  below  that  standard,  or  no  higher ;  he  is  the  servant  of  God 
who  lives  above  his  age  "  (Frederick  Robertson). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Point  out  the  Question  with  which  Question  39  is  logically  and  doctrinalhj  con 
nected  in  the  scheme  of  the  Catechism,  and  characterize  in  Catechism  language  the 
intervening  Questions. 

2.  Expand  and  illustrate  Macfarlan's  position  that  the  second  part  of  the  Catechism 
loads  men  to  Clirist. 

3.  Give  illustrations  of  God's  decretive  and  preceptive  will. 

4.  Supply  scriptures  in  support  of  Christian's  contention  against  Talkative,  The  soul 
of  religion  is  the  practick  part. 

Q.  40.  What  did  God  at  first  reveal  to  man  for  the  rule  of  his 
obedience  ? 

A.  The  rule  which  God  at  first  revealed  to  man  for  his 
obedience,  was  the  moral  law.* 

*  Rom.  ii.  14 :  For  when  the  Gentiles,  which  have  not  the  law,  do  by  nature  the 
things  contained  in  the  law,  these,  having  not  the  law,  are  a  law  unto  themselves. 
Vcr.  15  :  Which  show  the  work  of  the  law  written  in  their  hearts,  their  conscience 
also  bearing  witness,  and  their  thoughts  the  meanwhile  accusing  or  else  excusing 
one  another.  Rom.  x.  5  :  For  Moses  describeth  the  righteousness  which  is  of  the 
law,  That  the  man  which  doeth  those  things  shall  live  by  them. 

the  moral  law.  Mos,  a  Latin  word  signifying  manners  or  conduct,  hence 
morals,  morality.  Philosophers  sometimes  call  the  conscience  the  moral 
sense,  because  it  concerns  itself  with  matters  of  conduct  and  character. 

The  etymological  sense  of  law  is  "  that  which  lies,"  or  is  in  due  and  proper 
order.  The  word  varies  in  its  meaning  according  to  the  subject  treated  of. 
When  we  speak  about  natural  objects,  such  as  the  constitution  of  the  world, 
and  the  life  of  man  and  beast  in  it,  we  use  the  word  law  of  a  divinely  estab 
lished  order  and  uniformity  in  the  sequence  of  events.  Thus  we  speak  of  the 
law  of  gravitation,  the  laws  of  mechanics,  chemistry,  health,  and  such  like. 
Again  we  use  the  same  word  for  the  enactments  and  regulations  which  hold 
society  together  in  families  and  states.  We  speak  of  the  law  of  the  family,  and 
the  law  of  the  land.  But  the  moral  law  is  that  which  the  Creator  and  Law 
giver  and  Judge  of  all  men  hath  laid  on  every  man's  conscience,  and  according 
to  which  all  men  are  commanded  to  live,  and  according  to  which  all  shall  at 
last  be  judged.  "That  which  doth  assign  unto  each  thing  the  kind,  that 
which  doth  moderate  the  force  and  power,  that  which  doth  appoint  the  form 
and  measure  of  working,  the  same  we  term  a  law.  .  .  .  All  things  therefore 
do  work  after  a  sort  according  to  law  :  all  other  things  according  to  a  law, 
whereof  some  superior,  unto  whom  they  are  subject,  is  author  ;  only  the 
works  and  operations  of  God  have  Him  both  for  their  worker,  and  for  the 
law  whereby  they  are  wrought.  The  being  of  God  is  a  kind  of  law  to  His 
working  j  for  the  perfection  which  God  is,  giveth  perfection  to  that  He  doeth* 


THE   MORAL   LAW.  103 

.  .  .  Therefore  of  law  there  can  be  no  less  acknowledged,  than  that  her  seat 
is  the  bosom  of  God,  her  voice  the  harmony  of  the  world ;  all  things  in 
heaven  and  earth  do  her  homage,  the  very  least  as  feeling  her  care,  and  the 
greatest  as  not  exempted  from  her  power ;  both  angels  and  men  and 
creatures  of  what  sort  soever,  though  each  in  different  sort  and  manner,  yet 
all  with  uniform  consent, [  admiring  her  as  the  mother  of  their  peace  and 
joy"  (Hooker).  (See  Dean  Church's  Clarendon  Press  edition  of  Hooker's 
First  Book.  Let  all  students  especially  possess  and  master  this  classical 
piece  of  work. ) 

But  the  special  line  of  thought  more  immediately  before  us  is  well  carried 
out  in  the  corresponding  part  of  the  Larger  Catechism,"  where  we  are 
taught  that  the  moral  law  is  the  declaration  of  the  will  of  God  to  mankind, 
directing  and  binding  every  one  to  personal,  perfect,  and  perpetual  con 
formity  and  obedience  thereunto,  in  the  frame  and  disposition  of  the  whole 
man,  soul  and  body,  and  in  performance  of  all  those  duties  of  holiness  and 
righteousness  which  he  oweth  to  God  and  man ;  promising  life  upon  the 
fulfilling,  and  threatening  death  upon  the  breach  of  it. 

Note. — In  our  day  the  scientific  conception  of  law  has  so  possessed  and 
intoxicated  many  of  us,  that  the  still  truer  and  nobler  conception  of  GOD  has 
all  but  passed  out  of  mind.  The  conception  of  a  Creator  and  Preserver  has 
become  absorbed  and  lost  in  that  stately  order  and  most  regular  and 
harmonious  law  of  nature  which  He  has  instituted,  and  which  He  constantly 
sustains.  The  operation  is  so  majestic,  that  it  has  cast  the  Operator  into  a 
passing  shadow.  The  instrument  is  so  intricate  and  complex,  that  it  has  for 
the  moment  almost  hidden  the  Hand  that  holds  it.  But  surely  science  is  not 
to  continue  to  dispense  with  the  great  First  Cause  and  Author  of  all.  For  that 
noblest  and  most  fruitful  of  conceptions  gives  dignity  and  depth,  elasticity 
and  spirituality  to  the  otherwise  hard  and  sterile  idea  of  natural  law.  To  the 
truest  philosophy  LAW  is  that  divine  order  and  harmony  that  reigns  over, 
penetrates,  and  sustains  all  things,  human  and  divine ;  and  to  discover  which 
is  the  wisest  pursuit  and  noblest  crown  of  human  wisdom,  as  to  submit,  to 
confess,  and  ally  ourselves  to  it  is  the  sum  of  our  duty  and  the  source  and 
guarantee  of  our  blessedness. 

USES. — I.  For  the  use  of  the  moral  law  to  all  men,  and  for  its  particular 
use  to  the  unregenerate,  and  its  special  use  to  regenerate  men,  be  careful 
to  consult  Answers  95,  96,  and  97  in  Larger  Catechism. 

2.  What  is  the  first  inference  from  hence  ?    That  God  will  proceed  with 
men  by  different  rules  in  the  day  of  judgment,  according  to  the  different 
laws  they  have  lived  under  in  this  world  (Rom.  ii.  12). 

3.  What  is  the  second  inference  ?    That  those  who  have  sinned  against  the 
clearest  light  and  best  helps  will,  if  they  die  impenitent,  be  judged  to 
the  greatest  misery  (Matt.  ii.  23  ;  Heb.  ii.  3). 

4.  What  is  the  third  inference  ?    That  as  we  are  to  prize  the  moral  law 
highly  as  a  rule  of  life  (Ps.  cxix.  105),  so  we  are  to  bless  God  for  the 
gospel  dispensation,  by  which  only  we  can  attain  to  justification  and 
salvation  (Flavel). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Give  illustrations  of  the  laws  of  nature,  the  ceremonial  law,  the  moral  law, 

2.  Explain  the  Pauline  phrases  /—The  Gentiles  which  have  not  the  law,  are  a  law 
unto  themselves ;  the  law  entered  that  the  offence  might  abound ;  without  the  law 
sin  was  dead ;  I  was  alive  without  the  law  once ;  as  touching  the  law  a  Pharisee ; 
the  law  was  a  schoolmaster. 


104          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM    WITH   A    COMMENTARY. 

Q.  41.    Where  is  the  moral  law  summarily  comprehended? 
A.  The  moral  law  is   summarily  comprehended  in  the  ten 
commandments.11 

u  Deut.  x.  4 :  And  he  wrote  on  the  tables,  according  to  the  first  writing,  the  ten 
commandments,  which  the  Lord  spake  unto  you  in  the  mount,  out  of  the  midst  of 
the  fire,  in  the  day  of  the  assembly  ;  and  the  Lord  gave  them  unto  me.  Matt. 
xix.  17  :  ...  if  thou  wilt  enter  into  life,  keep  the  commandments. 


summarily  comprehended — We  have  in  the  text  and  context  first  the 
moral  law,  then  the  summary  of  that  law  in  the  ten  commandments,  and 
then  the  ten  commandments  again  summarized. 

Now  where  was  the  moral  law  published  in  extenso  before  it  was 
summarized  in  the  Decalogue  ?  Moses  received  the  two  tables  containing  a 
summary  of  the  moral  law  at  Sinai,  and  we  accordingly  call  it  the  Law  of 
Moses,  and  we  do  not  speak  misleadingly  if  we  know  what  we  say.  The 
moral  law  then  became  the  law  of  Moses,  but  it  was  the  law  of  God  to  all 
mankind  long  before  Moses  was  born.  The  moral  law  was  first  published, 
not  when  the  tables  of  stone  were  graven  at  Sinai,  but  when  the  Holy  Ghost 
wrote  the  law  of  God  on  the  tables  of  Adam's  heart.  The  moral  law  is 
the  "light  which  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world,"  and  that 
light  burned  its  brightest  when  it  was  first  kindled  in  the  soul  of  man.  Moses 
was  not  that  light,  but  he  came  to  bear  witness  of  that  light.  Moses  was 
merely  commissioned  to  refurbish  the  tarnished  lamp  of  the  moral  law,  and 
to  feed  its  dying  flame  with  fresh  oil.  He  did  not  kindle  the  light,  he  only 
set  it  in  a  candlestick,  so  that  it  might  give  light  to  all  that  were  in  the  house 
of  Israel.  It  was  the  moral  law  of  human  nature,  the  law  of  conscience,  the 
law  of  creation  that  was  summarized  and  republished  in  the  ten  command 
ments. 

the  ten  commandments.  The  oldest  form  of  the  ten  commandments 
is  found  in  the  twentieth  chapter  of  the  book  of  Exodus  ;  another  form  is 
found  in  the  fifth  of  Deuteronomy.  There  are  some  slight  differences  between 
the  two  forms,  but  the  differences  do  not  touch  anything  essential  or  im 
portant.  The  Scriptures  repeatedly  tell  us  that  the  commandments  are  ten  in 
number,  but  the  commandments  are  nowhere  tabulated  or  numbered  so  as  to 
fix  for  us  where  each  and  every  separate  commandment  begins  and  ends. 
And  thus  it  is,  that  while  all  schools  of  interpretation  accept  the  same  number 
of  commandments,  they  have  not  all  classified  the  commandments  in  the  same 
way.  Thus  the  Jewish  doctors  took  what  we  call  the  preface  to  the  com 
mandments  and  reckoned  it  a  commandment,  making  it  the  first  of  the  ten. 
And  then,  in  order  to  keep  the  proper  number,  they  ran  our  first  and  second 
commandments  into  one.  The  Catechism  of  the  Council  of  Trent,  the  autho 
ritative  symbol  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  omits  the  second  commandment,  and 
then  divides  the  tenth  commandment  into  two.  The  classification  that 
obtains  in  the  Shorter  Catechism  is  as  old  as  the  days  of  our  Lord,  it  was 
adopted  by  many  of  the  Fathers,  it  is  the  classification  accepted  by  the 
Greek  Church,  and  it  has  the  approval  of  nearly  all  the  Reformed  divines. 
''The  four  first  commandments  contain  our  duty  to  God,  and  the  other 
six  our  duty  to  man  "  (Larger  Catechism).  (See  Macpherson's  Confession, 
chap,  xix.) 


THE   MORAL   LAW.  105 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Master,  and  t'isn  without  the  booh  write  out  an   abstract  of  the  eight  rules 
supplied   in   the   Larger   Catechism  for   the   right   understanding    of  the     ten    com 
mandments. 

2.  Explain  and  illustrate  the  exception   to  the  fifth  rule:   Yet   every   particular 
duty  is  not  to  be  done  at  all  times. 

3.  Explain  and  illustrate  Bengel's  analysis :    The   dispensation  of  law  respecting 
the  human  race  is  threefold:—!.  Before  the  law;    2.  Under  the  law;    3.  Under 
grace.    Men  severally  experience  the  power  of  that  dispensation  (Rom.  uii.). 


Q.  42.    What  is  the  sum  of  the  ten  commandments  ? 

A.  The  sum  of  the  ten  commandments  is,  To  love  the  Lord 
our  God  with  all  our  heart,  with  all  our  soul,  with  all  our  strength, 
and  with  all  our  mind  j  and  our  neighbour  as  ourselves/ 

v  Matt.  xxii.  37  :  Jesus  said  unto  him,  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with 
all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind.  Ver.  38  :  This  is  the 
first  and  great  commandment.  Ver.  39  :  And  the  second  is  like  unto  it,  Thou 
shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself.  Ver.  40  :  On  these  two  commandments  hang 
all  the  law  and  the  prophets. 

The  sum — The  sum  of  a  summary.  (See  Answer  41.)  The  pith  and 
marrow  of  the  moral  law. 

to  love  the  Lord  our  God  with  all  our  heart,  soul,  strength,  and  mind 

— The  original  of  this  answer  is  found  in  Deut.  vi.  This  passage  formed  pirt 
of  the  great  creed  of  Israel  which  was  written  on  the  phylacteries  of  all  the 
people,  and  was  committed  to  memory  by  all  their  children.  It  is  remarked 
by  Dean  Plumptre  that  there  is  something  striking  and  instructive  in  the  fact 
that  words  from  this  passage  in  Deuteronomy  were  the  weapons  with  which 
our  Lord  baffled  the  attacks  of  the  tempter,  and  that  they  throughout  formed 
the  keynote  of  His  teaching. 

The  anatomy  of  the  inner  man  here  given  is  not  perhaps  of  that  exact  and 
scientific  character  that  modern  psychology  would  sustain,  but  it  is  after  the 
rich  and  impressive  manner  of  Holy  Scripture.  "Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord 
thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  that  is,  kindly  and  affectionately  ;  with  all  thy 
soul,  that  is,  wisely  and  discreetly ;  with  all  thy  might,  that  is,  stedfastly  and 
constantly.  Let  the  love  of  thy  heart  inflame  thy  zeal  towards  Him  ;  let  the 
knowledge  of  thy  soul  guide  it ;  let  the  constancy  of  thy  might  confirm  it. 
Let  it  be  fervent,  let  it  be  circumspect,  let  it  be  invincible  "  (Bernard  Upon  the 
Canticles). 

"  Without  the  heart,  obedience  is  nothing,  obedience  is  impossible.  With 
out  the  heart,  a  man's  external  acts  are  no  more  than  the  motions  of  the  limbs 
of  a  wooden  image  ;  have  no  more  of  the  nature  of  obedience.  .  .  .  We  must 
love  God  as  much  as  our  capacity  will  allow.  .  .  .  And  though  it  is  not  easy 
precisely  to  fix  the  limits  of  man's  capacity  to  love  God,  yet  in  general  we 
may  determine  that  his  capacity  of  love  is  co-extended  with  his  capacity  of 
knowledge ;  the  exercise  of  the  understanding  opens  up  the  wav  for  the 
exercise  of  the  heart "  (Jonathan  Edwards). 


106          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

and  our  neighbour  as  ourselves.  "And  to  do  to  others  what  we  would 
have  them  do  to  us"  (Larger  Catechism).  Neighbour,  A.S.  nea/i,  nigh,  and 
boor,  a  husbandman  ;  the  man  whose  field  lies  next  to  ours. 

The  need  for  this  commandment  is  seen  from  the  fact  that  all  men  by  nature 
live  "in  malice  and  envy,  hateful  and  hating  one  another."  "Hateful," 
says  Goodwin,  "every  man  is  to  another  man,  more  or  less;  he  is  hated  of 
another,  and  he  hateth  another  man  more  or  less.  And  if  his  nature  were  let 
out  to  the  full,  there  is  that  in  him,  his  hand  would  be  against  every  man,  as 
is  said  of  Ishmael,  Homo  homini  lupus."  "All  men,"  says  Pascal,  "  naturally 
hate  one  another."  Now  it  is  into  the  human  heart  thus  hating  and  hateful 
that  this  holy  law  enters.  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself.  The 
Apostle  James  calls  this  "the  royal  law,"  because  it  is  the  supreme  and 
master  law,  and  because  it  comes  as  a  new  commandment  from  Jesus  Christ 
our  heavenly  King.  "This  is  the  whole  law,"  said  Rabbi  Hillel,  "all  else 
is  interpretation."  And  John  Locke,  in  his  Conduct  of  the  Understanding, 
says,  "Our  Saviour's  great  rule,  that  we  should  love  our  neighbour  as  our 
selves,  is  such  a  fundamental  truth  for  the  regulating  of  human  society,  that  I 
think  by  that  alone  one  might  without  difficulty  determine  all  the  cases  and 
doubts  in  social  morality." 

"  Only  add 

Deeds  to  thy  knowledge  answerable  ;  add  faith  ; 
Add  virtue,  patience,  temperance  ;  add  love, 
By  name  to  come  call'd  charity,  the  soul 
Of  all  the  rest ;  then  wilt  thou  not  be  loath 
To  leave  this  paradise,  but  shalt  possess 
A  paradise  within  thee  happier  far." 

— MICHAEL  to  ADAM  in  MILTON. 

USES. — I.  "What  a  man's  love  is,"  says  Augustine,  "that  he  is.  Lovest 
thou  earth?  thou  art  earth.  Lovest  thou  God?  what  shall  I  say?  Thou 
shalt  be  god.  .  .  .  Nought  else  maketh  good  and  evil  actions,  save  good 
or  evil  affections." 

2.  "True  virtue  essentially  consists  in  Benevolence"  (Jonathan  Edwards). 

3.  "  Are  all  men  to  be  loved  alike,  and  with  the  same  degree  of  love?   No  ; 
though  we  must  love  all  men  with  the  love  of  benevolence,  yet  the  saints 
only  with  the  love  of  complacence  (Ps.   xvi.   3,   xv.  4  ;    Gal.  vi.  8) " 
(Flavel). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Where  was  the  moral  law  to  be  found  before   it  was  gathered  up  into  the  ten 
commandments  ? 

2.  Explain  royal  law  and  golden  rule  as  applied  to  this  Answer. 

3.  Explain  and  illustrate  Pascal's  saying :  To  love  man,  you  must  know  him ;  to 
know  Goi,  you  must  love  Him. 

4.  Study  Butler's  famous  sermons  Upon  the  Love  of  our  Neighbour  and  Upon  tlio 
Love  of  God. 

5.  Neander  points  out  that  all  the  leading  Christian  virtues  are  but  so  many  forms 
of  love,  and  refers  in  proof  to  1  Cor,  xiii.     Name  some  of  the  virtues  the  apostle 
describes  under  the  head  of  Charity.    Commit  to  memory  Paraphrase  xlix. 


THE   PREFACE   TO   THE   TEN   COMMANDMENTS.  1 07 

Q.  43.   What  is  the  preface  to  the  ten  commandment  si 

A.  The  preface  to  the  ten  commandments  is  in  these  words, 
I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  which  have  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of 
Egypt,  out  of  the  house  of  bondage.™ 

Q.  44.    What  doth  the  preface  to  the  ten  commandments  teach  us  ? 

A.  The  preface  to  the  ten  commandments  teacheth  us,  That 
because  God  is  the  Lord,  and  our  God,  and  Redeemer,  therefore 
we  are  bound  to  keep  all  his  commandments. x 

w  Ex.  xx.  2. 

x  Luke  i.  74 :  That  he  would  grant  unto  us,  that  we,  being  delivered  out  of  the 
hand  of  our  enemies,  might  serve  him  without  fear,  Ver.  75 :  In  holiness  and 
righteousness  before  him,  all  the  days  of  our  life,  i  Pet.  i.  15  :  But  as  he  which 
hath  called  you  is  holy,  so  be  ye  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation  ;  Ver.  16 : 
Because  it  is  written,  Be  ye  holy  ;  for  I  am  holy.  Ver.  17  :  And  if  ye  call  on  the 
Father,  who  without  respect  of  persons  judgeth  according  to  every  man's  work, 
pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear:  Ver.  18 :  Forasmuch  as  ye  know  that 
ye  were  not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things,  as  silver  and  gold,  from  your  vain 
conversation  received  by  tradition  from  your  fathers  ;  Ver.  19 :  But  with  the  precious 
blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot. 

The  preface — Lat.  prafatio,  something  spoken  before  ;  the  introduction  to 
a  book  ;  something  the  author  wishes  the  reader  to  know  before  he  com 
mences  to  read.  The  Gospel  of  Luke  and  the  Revelation  of  John  are  both 
introduced  by  prefaces.  The  preface  to  the  ten  commandments  is  a  simple 
statement  of  a  historical  fact.  The  children  of  Israel  were  in  bondage,  and 
by  a  mighty  hand  and  a  stretched  out  arm  Jehovah  delivered  them.  And  the 
preface  before  us  but  states  that  historical  fact  in  a  single  word. 

I  brought  thee  out — Mark  the  individualizing  manner  in  which  the  preface 
is  set  forth,  and  according  to  which  all  the  subsequent  commandments  are  drawn. 
The  Decalogue  is  a  national  covenant,  but  it  is  only  so  because  it  lies  on  the 
heart  and  conscience  of  every  Israelite.  "  We  must  say,  therefore,  that  he  is 
desirous  here  to  teach  that  most  excellent  lesson  to  those  who  read  the  sacred 
Scriptures,  that  each  separate  individual  by  himself,  when  he  is  an  observer 
of  the  law  and  obedient  to  God,  is  of  equal  estimation  with  a  whole  nation, 
be  it  ever  so  populous,  or,  I  might  rather  say,  with  all  the  nations  upon 
earth"  (Philo). 

I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  .  .  .  because  God  is  the  Lord — The  English 
Bible  neither  translates  nor  transliterates  the  original  Divine  Name  in  Ex. 
xx.  2  ;  it  follows  a  questionable  custom  of  the  Jewish  doctors  in  substituting 
LORD  for  JEHOVAH.  JAH  or  JEHOVAH  is  the  original  :  I  AM.  I  AM 
THAT  I  AM  is  the  translation  ;  and  LORD  is  simply  the  substitution  of 
another  name  or  title  in  room  of  a  transliteration  or  translation  of  the  original. 

Note. — Shaddai  or  El-Shaddai,  translated  God,  was  the  name  by  which 
their  Maker,  and  Ruler,  and  Guide  was  known  to  the  pre-Mosaic  patriarchs. 
Perhaps  the  best  modern  equivalent  of  this  ancient  and  august  name  is  our 
somewhat  vague  and  remote  epithet,  the  Deity.  This  name  recognized  the 
existence  of  the  Divine  Nature,  and  it  described  that  Nature  in  the  broadest 
and  most  general  way.  El-Shaddai,  Almighty  God,  called  Abraham,  and 


I08          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM    WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

pledged  the  fulfilment  of  His  covenant  promises  on  His  announced  and 
accepted  name.  The  name  El-Shaddai  kept  before  the  patriarchal  mind  the 
unity,  spirituality,  and  omnipotence  of  God,  and  on  these  great  truths,  as  a 
bridge  on  its  piers,  the  subsequent  revelations  of  God  all  reposed.  And  when 
some  further  but  still  kindred  titles  were  added  to  this  great  name ;  when 
God  successively  announced  Himself  as  the  God  of  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and 
Jacob,  and  the  God  of  Bethel,  in  all  these  amplifications  and  applications  of 
El-Shaddai  the  sacred  writer  but  embodies  in  a  memorable  phrase  this  and 
that  man's  lifelong  experience  of  the  divine  power  and  helpfulness.  But  a 
new  epoch  in  the  publication  of  the  Divine  Name  occurred  in  the  time  of 
Moses.  For  when  God  was  giving  His  commission  to  His  chosen  servant  to 
put  himself  at  the  head  of  the  tribes  of  Israel,  and  when  Moses  raised 
the  difficulty  that  the  people  might  doubt  his  authority,  and  demand  his 
credentials,  and  ask  him  in  whose  name  he  came,  he  was  told  to  say  to  them, 
JEHOVAH,  I  AM,  hath  sent  me  unto  you.  The  Hebrew  student  at  once 
recognizes  this  to  be  in  the  circumstances  an  immense  step  onward  in  the 
progressive  revelation  of  the  Divine  Name ;  and  even  the  most  unlearned 
may,  on  due  consideration,  see  something  of  its  great  importance.  El- 
Shaddai  was  God's  primitive  and  first  published  name,  and  JAH,  JEHOVAH, 
reposed  on  and  was  an  extension  of  that.  The  name  Jehovah,  as  every  one 
knows  who  has  paid  any  attention  to  the  composition,  contents,  and  charac 
teristics  of  the  book  of  Genesis,  was  by  no  means  an  unknown  name  to  the 
pre  captivity  patriarchs.  All  commentators  are  agreed  that  the  words  in 
Exodus,  "  by  my  name  Jehovah  was  I  not  known  to  them,"  are  to  be  under 
stood  with  a  certain  latitude.  It  is  not  meant  that  no  such  name  as  Jehovah 
was  ever  heard  by  the  forefathers  of  the  Hebrew  people  in  the  divine 
announcements  made  to  them,  but  the  meaning  is  that  the  full  import  of  that 
name  had  not  been  opened  up  to  them.  There  is  an  economical  and  contem 
porary  sense  and  usage,  as  well  as  an  essential  and  permanent  truth  connected 
with  the  great  name  JEHOVAH,  I  AM.  \Vhen  God  said  I  AM,  He  thereby 
said,  there  is  no  otJier.  El-Shaddai  as  a  name  might  be  supposed  to  be 
borne,  as  a  matter  of  fact  it  was  borne,  by  the  divinities  of  other  nations,  just 
as  the  idolaters  of  our  own  day  call  their  idols  gods.  Egypt  and  Assyria 
insisted  that  El — the  Almighty — was  with  them,  if  not  exclusively,  yet  truly  ; 
and  therefore  now,  when  Israel  was  to  be  so  much  in  contact  and  collision 
with  other  nations  and  other  religions,  it  was  necessary  that  the  true  and  only 
God  should  take  to  Himself  a  name  that  taught  and  asserted  His  ALONE 
GODHEAD.  The  God  of  Abraham  and  Isaac  and  Jacob  is  now  by  a  succes 
sion  of  mighty  acts  to  prove  to  Israel  and  to  all  the  nations  that  HE  ALONE  Is, 
and  that  all  other  gods  are  but  dumb  and  dead  idols,  the  imagination  of  men's 
darkened  hearts,  and  the  work  of  their  impious  hands.  Neither  Baal  nor 
Ashtoreth,  neither  Jupiter  nor  Mercurius,  could  say  I  AM,  for,  in  the  apostle's 
words,  "we  know  that  an  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world."  But  when  a 
Hebrew  worshipper  came  to  his  God,  he  could  believe  and  be  sure  that  He 
is,  for  I  AM  is  His  very  name.  But  this  is  not  all.  For  as  to  the  Abrahamic 
name,  the  Almighty  God,  the  Revealing  Spirit  in  process  of  time  added  the 
names  and  titles,  God  of  Isaac  and  Jacob,  and  God  of  Bethel,  so,  to  the 
Mosaic  name  1  AM,  there  was  immediately  added,  "  Merciful  and  gracious, 
long-suffering,  and  abundant  in  goodness  and  truth."  The  thirty-fourth  of 
Exodus  is  one  of  the  very  fontal  passages  of  revelation.  This  great  well- 
spring,  high  up  in  the  hill  of  God,  always  recalls  to  the  mind  the  saying  of 
the  wise  man  :  "  All  the  rivers  run  into  the  sea  ;  into  the  place  from  whence 


THE   PREFACE   TO   THE   TEN   COMMANDMENTS.  109 

the  rivers  come,  thither  they  return  again."  All  the  previous  proclamations 
of  the  Divine  Name  were  but  well-springs  sent  up  to  water  the  earth  from  this 
as  yet  undiscovered  sea.  And  from  this  supreme  Old  Testament  scripture, 
as  from  a  perennial  and  everlasting  fountain,  all  succeeding  prophets  and 
psalmists  come  hither  to  draw.  And  as  God's  name  JAH  is  worthily  written 
in  our  largest  letters,  so  that  parent  passage  might  well  be  printed  in  letters 
of  gold  a  ringer  deep,  if  only  to  arrest  the  unthinking  reader,  and  make  him 
tarry  to  inquire  what  this  supreme  scripture  may  mean,  and  to  learn  on  what 
holy  ground  he  here  ignorantly  stands:  "And  JEHOVAH  passed  before 
Moses,  and  proclaimed,  JEHOVAH,  JEHOVAH-E1,  merciful  and  gracious,  long- 
suffering,  and  abundant  in  goodness  and  truth,  keeping  mercy  for  thousands, 
and  forgiving  iniquity  and  transgression  and  sin."  Like  doves  to  their  win 
dows,  like  the  hart  to  the  water-brooks,  so  do  all  the  prophets  and  psalmists 
in  Israel  turn  back  to  this  scripture  till  the  coining  of  Christ.  (See  Westcott's 
excellent  note  on  the  Divine  Name  in  his  Epistles  of  St.  John.) 

and  God — JEHOVAH,  not  Baal,  nor  any  of  the  gods  of  the  heathen,  is  our 
God,  confessed  the  devout  Hebrew.  "  To  take  the  Lord  for  our  God  is  the 
natural  part  of  the  covenant ;  the  supernatural  part  is  to  take  Christ  for  our 
Redeemer.  The  former  is  first  necessary  and  implied  in  the  latter  "  (Baxter, 
in  Saint's  Rest). 

and  Redeemer — This  great  and  expressive  name  which  our  Lord  bears  in 
the  New  Testament,  was  first  borne  by  Jehovah  in  the  house  of  Israel.  The 
word  literally  means  one  who  pays  a  ransom,  and  thus  buys  back  any  person 
or  thing  that  has  been  in  the  possession  of  another.  From  this  the  word 
comes  to  mean  a  deliverer  by  conquest,  as  in  Exodus  :  "  I  will  bring  ycu 
out  from  under  the  burdens  of  the  Egyptians,  and  I  will  rid  you  out  of  their 
bondage,  and  I  will  redeem  you  with  a  stretched  out  arm,  and  with  great 
judgment."  In  the  captivity  and  post-captivity  prophets  the  redemption 
promised  and  celebrated  is  that  which  Jehovah  wrought  for  His  people  in  the 
overthrow  of  Babylon.  (See  the  marginal  note  on  Hos.  ix.  3,  in  which  it  is 
pointed  out  that  in  the  days  of  that  prophet  Egypt  had  come  to  stand  for 
Assyria,  and  Babylon,  as  in  our  day  it  often  stands  for  our  unregenerate 
estate.  And  thus  a  language  was  developed  and  a  memory  accumulated  in 
the  Old  Testament  that  were  divinely  adapted  to  illustrate  and  describe  the 
great  redemption  accomplished  by  our  Lord.)  (See  Answer  20  et  seq.) 

therefore  we  are  bound  to  keep  all  his  commandments.  "Therefore 
we  are  bound  to  take  Him  for  our  God  alone,  and  to  keep  all  His  command 
ments  "  (Larger  Catechism).  (See  Answer  52,  under  reasons  annexed.) 

USES. — I.  From  this  exposition  we  must  see  the  absolute  necessity  for 
sacred  learning  in  all  competent  expositors  of  the  divine  word.  In 
studies  of  this  kind,  and  especially  in  all  studies  connected  with  the 
development  of  revelation  and  the  progress  of  Scripture,  it  is  indis 
pensable  that  the  expositor  be  a  student,  and  that  as  a  student  he  possess 
some  acquaintance  with  the  sacred  tongues  in  which  the  Holy  Scriptures 
were  originally  written. 

2.  There  is  no  name  and  no  assemblage  of  names  so  necessary  for  us  to 
know  and  understand  as  the  names  of  God,  and  yet  there  is  no  group 
of  names  in  all  our  vocabulary  that  we  utter  so  loosely,  listen  to  so 
languidly,  and  consider  so  little  what  they  discover,  connote,  and  convey. 
What  is  His  name,  and  what  is  His  Son's  name,  if  thou  canst  tell  ? 


110          THE    SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH    A    COMMENTARY. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Derive  preface,  and  give  some  examples  from  Scripture. 

2.  Explain   etymologically   and  historically   the  divine  names  and  titles  on  which 
the  argument  of  the  preface  rests. 

3.  Gather  from   the  prophets  and  Psalms  a  large  group  of  passages  in  which  the 
names  God  and  Lord  occur  in   the  same   clause  ;   explain  the  exact  meaning,  and 
show  that  the  passages  are  historically  and  doctrinally  true,  and   that  they  are  in 
no  case  tautological  or  redundant.    For  instance,  paraphrase  and  expand  Ps.  Ixxxui. 
8-12. 

4.  In  view'  of  all  the  above,  explain  Kelt's  remark :  Jonah  tried  to  quarrel  with 
God  by  praying  to  Jehovah. 

5.  In  reading  the  Scriptures,   and   especially  the  Old  Testament,  the  Divine  Names 
God  and  Lord   may  usually   be  understood  thus :  God,  opposed  to  roan ;   Jehovah, 
Lord,  opposed  to  all  false  gods  ;  Jehovah,  Lord,  distinguished  from  Messiah.    Give 
illustrations. 

6.  Also  criticise  Samson's  utterance : 

All  the  contest  is  now 
'Twixt  God  and  Dagon  (Agonistes,  461). 


Q.  45.    Which  is  the  first  commandment  ? 

A.  The  first  commandment  is,  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods 
before  me? 

Q.  46.    What  is  required  in  the  first  commandment1! 

A.  The  first  commandment  requireth  us  to  know  and  acknow 
ledge  God  to  be  the  only  true  God,  and  our  God;z  and  to 
worship  and  glorify  him  accordingly.31 

Q.  47.    What  is  forbidden  in  the  first  commandment  1 

A.  The  first  commandment  forbiddeth  the  denying,b  or  not 
worshipping  and  glorifying  the  true  God  as  God,c  and  our  God;d 

y  Ex.  xx.  3. 

z  i  Chron.  xxviii.  9 :  And  thou,  Solomon  my  son,  know  thou  the  God  of  thy 
father,  and  serve  him  with  a  perfect  heart,  and  with  a  willing  mind  ;  for  the  Lord 
searcheth  all  hearts,  and  understandeth  all  the  imaginations  of  the  thoughts  :  if 
thou  seek  him,  he  will  be  found  of  thee  ;  but  if  thou  forsake  him,  he  will  cast  thee 
off  for  ever.  Deut.  xxvi.  17 :  Thou  hast  avouched  the  Lord  this  day  to  be  thy 
God,  and  to  walk  in  his  ways,  and  to  keep  his  statutes,  and  his  commandments, 
and  his  judgments,  and  to  hearken  unto  his  voice. 

a  Matt.  iv.  10 :  Then  saith  Jesus  unto  him,  Get  thee  hence,  Satan  :  for  it  is 
written,  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  him  only  shalt  thou  serve. 
Ps.  xxix.  2  :  Give  unto  the  Lord  the  glory  due  unto  his  name  ;  worship  the  Lord 
in  the  beauty  of  holiness. 

b  Ps.  xiv.  i :  The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart,  There  is  no  God. 

c  Rom.  i.  21 :  Because  that,  when  they  knew  God,  they  glorified  him  not  as 
God,  neither  were  thankful ;  but  became  vain  in  their  imaginations,  and  their 
foolish  heart  was  darkened. 

d  Ps.  Ixxxi.  10 :  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  which  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of 
Egypt :  open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill  it.  Ver.  n  :  But  my  people  would 
not  hearken  to  mv  voice  ;  and  Israel  would  none  of  me. 


THE   FIRST   COMMANDMENT.  Ill 

and  the  giving  of  that  worship  and  glory  to  any  other,  which  is 
due  to  him  alone.e 

Q.  48.  What  are  we  specially  taught  by  these  words  [before  me] 
in  the  first  commandment  ? 

A.  These  words  [before  me]  in  the  first  commandment  teach 
us,  That  God,  who  seeth  all  things,  taketh  notice  of,  and  is  much 
displeased  with,  the  sin  of  having  any  other  god.f 

0  Rom.  i.  25 :  Who  changed  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie,  and  worshipped  and 
served  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator,  who  is  blessed  for  ever.  Amen. 

f  Ezek.  viii.  5,  to  the  end  of  the  chapter.  Ps.  xliv.  20 :  If  we  have  forgotten 
the  name  of  our  God,  or  stretched  out  our  hands  to  a  strange  god  ;  Ver.  21 : 
Shall  not  God  search  this  out  ?  for  he  knoweth  the  secrets  of  the  heart. 

This  is  the  first  commandment,  and  it  was  of  the  first  necessity  at  the  time 
it  was  published,  For  the  whole  human  family  having  fallen  from  the 
knowledge  of  God  and  from  all  communion  with  Him,  and  a  God  being 
indispensable  to  every  conscience  and  heart,  men  had  conceived  and  manufac 
tured  all  manner  of  gods  for  themselves.  Each  separate  tribe  and  nation  had 
created  its  own  divinity  according  to  its  own  character.  And  accordingly 
the  first  thing  to  be  done  in  beginning  to  establish  the  true  religion  in  Israel, 
and  through  Israel  in  the  whole  earth,  was  to  sweep  all  superstitious  and 
mischievous  notions  about  local  and  contending  deities  clean  out  of  the  mind. 
Israel  must  learn  and  hold  and  teach  that  there  is  no  God  but  Jehovah  only. 
And  He  was  not  a  new  or  unknown  God  who  gave  to  Israel  this  comprehen 
sive  and  exclusive  law.  He  was  the  God  of  Adam  and  Abel,  of  Enoch  and 
Noah,  of  Abraham  and  Isaac  and  Jacob.  He  was  the  God  of  Moses  and 
Aaron ;  it  was  He  who  by  the  hand  of  Moses  had  just  delivered  them  out  of 
the  land  of  Egypt.  It  was  He  who  said  to  the  whole  house  of  Israel,  and  to 
every  individual  Israelite,  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  me.  In 
Calvin's  Instittdes  there  is  an  admirable  analysis  which  gathers  out  all  those 
things  in  this  commandment  that  make  it  common  to  Israel  and  to  us.  The 
commandment  came  to  them,  and  it  still  comes  to  us,  carrying  the  divine 
demand  on  all  our  adoration,  trust,  invocation,  and  thanksgiving.  And 
these  affections,  attitudes,  aud  acts,  rightly  understood  and  spiritually  per 
formed,  fulfil  and  satisfy  this  first  and  fundamental  commandment. 

The  first  commandment—"  In  duties  themselves  there  is  an  order,  which 
it  is  of  much  importance  to  observe.  There  is  scarcely  a  greater  or  more 
mischievous  error  than  one  which  has  found  advocates,  even  among  some 
who  profess  a  regard  to  revealed  truth ;  namely,  that  the  principal  service 
which  God  requires  of  us,  and  which  of  course  we  need  to  be  much 
concerned  about,  is  the  performance  si  social  duties — the  duties  of  justice  and 
benevolence  to  our  fellow-men.  Now,  that  social  duties  constitute  an  indispens 
able  part  of  all  true  religion,  we  both  admit  and  inculcate.  But  we  maintain 
that  the  duties  first  in  rank  and  importance  are  those  we  owe  immediately  to 
God,  our  Creator  and  Redeemer  ;  that  He  is  infinitely  the  greatest  and  best 
of  all  beings,  and  that  if  reverence,  love,  service,  and  worship  be  due  to  Him 
at  all,  our  obligations  to  these  must  of  necessity  be  higher  and  more  sacred 
than  any  other  "  (Green). 


112          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

require th— Conformity  to.     (See  Answer  14.) 

to  know  and  acknowledge— "This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  krow 
Thee  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  Thou  hast  sent "  (John 
xvii.  3).  "In  all  thy  ways  acknowledge  Him,  and  He  shall  direct  thy 
steps  "  (Prov.  iii.  6).  "  The  true  knowledge  of  God  includes  the  love  of  God. 
'  To  love  man,  we  must  know  him :  to  know  God,  we  must  love  Him.'  They 
who  will  not  love  God,  cannot  even  aright  know  of  God.  To  know  God  is  to 
know  by  experience  that  God  is  good,  and  this  God  makes  known  to  the 
soul  He  loves,  while  it  meditates  on  Him,  reads  of  Him,  speaks  to  Him, 
adores  Him,  obeys  Him"  (Pusey). 

only  true  God — See  Answer  5.  The  epithet  only,  as  Meyer  says, 
bears  upon  the  whole  phrase  true  God.  The  term  true  shows  that  this  God 
alone  perfectly  answers  to  the  great  idea  expressed  by  the  word  GOD. 

worship  and  glorify  him  accordingly.  Short  for  ivorthship:  to  put 
proper  worth  upon  :  to  value  supremely  :  to  adore,  love,  and  serve.  "  The 
God  of  glory  is  the  sum  of  the  divine  praise  "  (Bengel). 

In  her  beautiful  book  on  the  Commandments,  Miss  Rossetti  calls  this  com 
mandment  the  Catholic  basis  on  which  the  Christian  structure  can  alone  be 
raised.  What  is  Catholic  underlies  what  is  Christian.  And  to  that  funda 
mental  doctrine  of  the  divine  unity  from  which  the  Christian  doctrine  is 
developed  there  has  been  granted  a  freer  currency  :  so  that  while  the- Jewish 
Church  knew  it  by  revelation,  multitudes  of  the  Gentile  world  knew  it,  or 
at  least  surmised  it,  by  intellectual  or  spiritual  enlightenment. 

forbiddeth — Want  of  conformity  to  or  transgression  of.     (See  Answer  14.) 

the  denying — This  commandment  forbiddeth  atheism,  speculative  and 
practical.  For  speculative  atheism  is  the  looking  upon  nature  and  man  as 
coming  into  existence  and  being  sustained  without  God  ;  while  practical 
atheism  is  just  vulgar  irreligion  :  living  "without  God  in  the  world." 
Many  who  would  shudder  at  the  name  of  atheist  are  yet  to  all  intents  and 
purposes  living  an  atheist's  life.  How  many  atheistic  hours  we  all  spend, 
and  how  many  atheistic  acts  we  all  perform,  let  each  man  say  for  himself. 

giving  that  worship  to  any  other — This  is  directed  against  all  idolatry, 
and  this  sin  is  treated  more  fully  in  and  under  the  second  commandment. 
Milton  makes  idolatry  the  first  result  of  Eve's  eating  the  forbidden  fruit  : — 

"  So  saying,  from  the  tree  her  steps  she  turned, 
But  first  low  reverence  done,  as  to  the  Power 
That  dwelt  within,  whose  presence  had  infus'd 
Into  the  plant  sciential  sap." 

before  me — In  my  presence,  which  is  <?;#;/zpresence.  There  is  no  place 
where  man  may  set  up  or  worship  another  God.  (See  Ps.  cxxxix.  1-12.) 

seeth,  taketh  notice  of,  and  is  much  displeased  with — Note  the  progress 
in  these  clauses.  "  How  doth  the  idolatry  forbidden  in  the  first,  differ  from 
that  forbidden  in  the  second  commandment  ?  The  idolatry  forbidden  in  the 
first  commandment  is  a  sin  respecting  the  Object  of  worship,  when  we  set  up 
anything  in  the  place  of  God,  which  by  nature  is  not  God.  But  that 
against  the  second  commandment  is,  when  we  pretend  to  worship  the  true 
God,  but  do  it  by  such  means,  and  in  such  a  manner  as  He  hath  not  required, 
or  hath  forbidden  "  (Flavel). 


THE   SECOND   COMMANDMENT.  113 

Q.  49.    Which  is  the  second  commandment  ? 

A.  The  second  commandment  is,  Thou  shalt  not  make  unto 
thee  any  graven  image,  or  any  likeness  of  any  thing  that  is  in 
heaven  above,  or  that  is  in  the  earth  beneath,  or  that  is  in  the  water 
under  the  earth :  thou  shalt  not  bow  down  thyself  to  them,  nor 
serve  them  ;  for  I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God,  visiting  the 
iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children  unto  the  third  and  fourth 
generation  of  them  that  hate  me:  and  showing  mercy  unto  thousands 
of  them  that  love  me,  and  keep  my  commandments  £ 

Q.  50.    What  is  required  in  the  second  commandment  1 

A.  The  second  commandment  requireth  the  receiving, 
observing,  and  keeping  pure  and  entire,  all  such  religious 
worship  and  ordinances  as  God  hath  appointed  in  his  word.'1 

Q.  51.    What  is  forbidden  in  the  second  commandment  1 

A.  The  second  commandment  forbiddeth  the  worshipping 
of  God  by  images,1  or  any  other  way  not  appointed  in  his 
word.J 

Q.  52.  What  are  the  reasons  annexed  to  the  second  com 
mandment  ? 

A.  The  reasons  annexed  to  the  second  commandment  are, 


s  Ex.  xx.  4,  5,  6. 

h  Deut.  xxxii.  46 :  And  he  said  unto  them,  Set  your  hearts  unto  all  the  words 
which  I  testify  among  you  this  day,  which  ye  shall  command  your  children  to 
observe  to  do,  all  the  words  of  this  law.  Matt,  xxviii.  20 :  Teaching  them  to 
observe  all  things  whatsoever  I  have  commanded  you  :  and,  lo,  I  am  with  you 
alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world.  Amen.  Acts  ii.  42  :  And  they  continued 
stedfastly  in  the  apostles'  doctrine  and  fellowship,  and  in  breaking  of  bread,  and 
in  prayers. 

1  Deut.  iv.  15  :  Take  ye  therefore  good  heed  unto  yourselves,  (for  ye  saw  no 
manner  of  similitude  on  the  day  that  the  Lord  spake  unto  you  in  Horeb  out  of  the 
midst  of  the  fire. )  Ver.  16  :  Lest  ye  corrupt  yourselves,  and  make  you  a  graven 
image,  the  similitude  of  any  figure,  the  likeness  of  male  or  female  ;  Ver.  17  :  The 
likeness  of  any  beast  that  is  on  the  earth,  the  likeness  of  any  winged  fowl  that 
flicth  in  the  air  ;  Ver.  18  :  The  likeness  of  any  thing  that  creepeth  on  the  ground, 
the  likeness  of  any  fish  that  is  in  the  waters  beneath  the  earth  :  Ver.  19  :  And  lest 
thou  lift  up  thine  eyes  unto  heaven,  and  when  thou  seest  the  sun,  and  the  moon, 
and  the  stars,  even  all  the  host  of  heaven,  shouldest  be  driven  to  worship  them, 
and  serve  them,  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  divided  unto  all  nations  under  the 
whole  heaven.  Ex.  xxxii.  8  :  They  have  turned  aside  quickly  out  of  the  way 
which  I  commanded  them :  they  have  made  them  a  molten  calf,  and  have 
worshipped  it,  and  have  sacrificed  thereunto,  and  said,  These  be  thy  gods,  O 
Israel,  which  have  brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt. 

J  Deut.  xii.  31  :  Thou  shalt  not  do  so  unto  the  Lord  thy  God :  for  every 
abomination  to  the  Lord  which  he  hateth  have  they  done  unto  their  gods  ;  for 
even  their  sons  and  their  daughters  they  have  burnt  in  the  fire  to  their  gods. 
Ver.  32 :  What  thing  soever  I  command  you,  observe  to  do  it :  thou  shalt  not 
add  thereto,  nor  diminish  from  it. 


114          THE    SHORTER    CATECHISM    WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

God's  sovereignty  over  us,k  his  propriety  in  us,1  and  the  zeal  he 
hath  to  his  own  worship.™ 

k  Ps.  xcv.  2 :  Let  us  come  before  his  presence  with  thanksgiving,  and  make  a 
joyful  noise  unto  him  with  psalms.  Ver.  3  :  For  the  Lord  is  a  great  God,  and  a 
great  King  above  all  gods.  Ver.  6  :  O  come,  let  us  worship  and  bow  down  ;  let 
us  kneel  before  the  Lord  our  maker. 

1  Ps.  xlv.  ii :  .  .  .  he  is  thy  Lord,  and  worship  thou  him. 

m  Ex.  xxxiv.  13  :  But  ye  shall  destroy  their  altars,  break  their  images,  and  cut 
down  their  groves.  Ver.  14 :  For  thou  shalt  worship  no  other  god  :  for  the  Lord, 
whose  name  is  Jealous,  is  a  jealous  God. 

The  unity  and  sole  supremacy  of  Jehovah  is  the  subject  of  the  first  com 
mandment,  and  in  the  same  manner  the  spirituality  of  the  Divine  Nature  is 
taught  and  guarded  in  the  second.  Locality,  limitation,  shape,  and  all  such 
like  creaturely  conditions,  are  to  be  put  out  of  our  minds  when  we  would 
think  aright  about  God.  These  things  are  never  in  any  way  to  be  associated 
with  God.  The  worship  of  God  is  to  be  purely  spiritual,  and  lest  its 
spirituality  should  be  invaded  or  infringed,  it  is  here  fenced  round  with  a 
most  explicit  and  rigorous  commandment  against  the  worship  of  images,  and 
even  their  manufacture.  The  unity  and  spirituality  of  God  are  accordingly 
the  two  corner-stones  of  the  Decalogue,  and  indeed  of  all  divine  revelation, 
Mosaic  and  Christian.  The  law  that  came  by  Moses,  and  the  grace  and 
truth  that  came  by  Jesus  Christ,  all  alike  rest  on  those  eternal  and  immutable 
truths  of  our  holy  faith. 

Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee  any  graven  image — In  Cruden's  article 
under  image,  he  characterizes  and  illustrates  nine  scriptural  senses  of  this 
word,  and  Aldis  Wright  in  Smith's  Bible  Dictionary  tells  us  that  there  are 
no  fewer  than  twenty-one  different  Hebrew  words  that  have  been  rendered 
in  the  Authorized  Version  either  by  idol  or  image.  Nothing  could  be  more 
instructive  and  significant  than  this  multiplicity  and  variety  of  words  desig 
nating  the  incentives,  instruments,  and  objects  of  idolatry.  At  the  same 
time,  stringent  and  indispensable  as  this  commandment  was  in  such  circum 
stances,  it  gives  no  countenance  to  the  superstitious  position  that  some  have 
taken  up  against  all  works  of  art  even  for  purposes  of  culture  and  pleasure. 
Referring  to  this  misreading  of  the  second  commandment,  Calvin  says  :  "I 
am  not  so  superstitious,  however,  as  to  think  that  all  visibk  .presentations 
of  every  kind  are  unlawful.  But  as  sculpture  and  painting  are  gifts  of  God, 
what  I  insist  on  is,  that  both  shall  be  used  purely  and  lawfully.  We  think 
it  unlawful  to  give  a  visible  shape  to  God,  because  God  Himself  has  forbidden  it, 
and  because  it  cannot  be  done  without- in  some  degree  tarnishing  His  glory." 

"  It  may  be  admitted,"  says  Kalisch  in  his  commentary  on  Exodus,  "that 
the  prohibition  expressed  in  our  text  has  exercised  a  retarding  influence  upon 
the  progress  and  development  of  the  plastic  arts  among  the  Hebrews,  as  a 
similar  interdiction  in  the  Koran  has  produced  a  similar  effect  among  the 
Arab  tribes.  .  .  .  But  it  is  an  incomprehensible  mistake,  if  it  is  believed 
that  the  plastic  arts  in  general,  sculpture  and  painting,  are  forbidden  in  our 
text.  Josephus  tells  us  that  the  Jews  would  not  even  suffer  the  image  of  the 
emperor  which  was  represented  on  the  eagles  of  the  Roman  soldiers,  and  a 
temple  in  Tiberias  was,  by  decree  of  the  Sanhedrin,  burnt  down,  merely 
because  it  was  ornamented  with  figures  of  animals  (Josephus'  Life,  xii. ).  Such 
a  barbarous  and  irrational  law  could  not  possibly  emanate  from  a  legislator 


THE    SECOND   COMMANDMENT,  115 

who  erected  a  holy  tent,  furnished  with  all  adornments  of  art  and  beauty,  and 
who  even  ordered  two  chembims  to  be  placed  in  the  Holy  of  Holies.  In  the 
first  temple  as  well  as  the  second,  was  an  abundance  of  plastic  works,  which 
nobody  has  found  to  be  at  variance  with  the  spirit  of  Mosaism."  "The  com 
mandment  which  forbade  the  making  of  graven  image  or  likeness  was  not 
observed  in  the  sanctuary  itself.  By  this  exception  it  was  made  evident  that 
the  enactment  was  directed  against  accidental  abuses  of  imitative  art,  and 
not  against  the  art  itself  "  ( Westcott). 

any  likeness  of  anything  that  is  in  heaven  above — "  Left  to  themselves, 
to  their  own  appetites,  fears,  caprices,  imaginations,  men  made  originally 
capable  of  discriminating  truth  from  falsehood  sought  out  many  inventions. 
Sun,  moon,  and  stars,  from  being  accounted  symbols,  came  to  be  rated  as 
gods ;  rivers  were  deified ;  beasts,  birds,  fishes,  reptiles,  all  were  adored  ; 
trees  waxed  oracular,  mountain-tops  grew  sacred,  light  and  darkness  engrossed 
each  its  representative  deity  ;  fire  had  its  own  formidable  divinity,  and  the 
world  of  the  dead  its  own.  Mere  attributes,  mere  operations,  became  em 
bodiments  capable  of  undergoing  invocation  and  receiving  worship ;  and 
destruction  claimed  its  horrid  ritual  of  human  sacrifice,  and  fruitfulness  was 
adored  with  such  rites  as  it  is  a  shame  even  to  speak  of "  (Miss  Rossetti's 
Letter  and  Spirit}. 

for  I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God — In  the  scientific  language  of 
theology,  this  is  called  an  anthropopathic  or  economical  manner  of  speech. 
God  here  speaks  to  man  after  the  manner  of  men.  He  takes  the  human 
passion  of  jealousy  to  himself  in  a  figure.  But  while  making  this  explana 
tion,  it  must  be  made  in  a  reverent,  guarded,  believing  manner.  To  say  God 
is  jealous  is  to  say  that  while  all  human  infirmity  and  evil  are  to  be  taken  out 
of  the  expression,  yet,  at  the  same  time,  we  are  to  receive  it  as  the  truest 
mode  of  conveying  to  us  what,  owing  to  the  imperfections  of  the  human 
mind  and  human  language,  cannot  otherwise  be  impressed  upon  us.  All 
Scripture,  at  least  all  Revelation,  is  and  must  be  more  or  less  anthropomorphic 
and  anthropopathic.  And  the  text  is  but  an  arresting  and  solemn  example 
of  this  necessary  and  universal  manner  of  divine  communications.  When 
Jehovah  represents  Himself  as  the  husband  of  the  Church  in  Israel,  and  as 
having  loved  her  with  an  everlasting  love,  her  infidelity  and  idolatry  come 
then  in  awful  impressiveness  to  be  spoken  of  as  kindling  jealousy  in  the 
divine  bosom.  The  thoughtful  reader  of  the  Old  Testament  will  recall  many 
passages  W^CAO  these  figures  of  speech  are  powerfully  employed.  But  let  it 
here  and  in  all  such  passages  be  remembered  that  the  scriptural  metaphors 
never  exaggerate  or  in  any  way  misrepresent  the  reality  ;  the  prophetic 
figures  never  overstate  the  facts.  Nahum  is  within  the  truth  when  he  utters 
his  burdensome  vision  :  "  God  is  jealous,  and  the  Lord  revengeth  ;  the 
Lord  revengeth,  and  is  furious ;  the  Lord  will  take  vengeance  on  His 
adversaries,  and  He  reserveth  wrath  for  His  enemies." 

visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children — Mozley  in  his 
able  work,  Ruling  Ideas  in  Early  Ages,  exhibits  the  operation  of  this  judicial 
principle  in  the  old  dispensation,  and  points  out  that  while  the  second  com 
mandment  and  its  sanctions  of  terror  and  of  comfort  remain  entirely  valid 
to  this  day,  yet  that  it  is  to  be  read  now  in  a  providential  and  didactic  sense 
rather  than  in  a  judicial  and  penal.  Children  are  not  now  punished  for  their 
fathers'  sins  though  they  still  suffer  in  many  ways  on  account  of  them.  (See 
Lecture  v.)  "  That  God  doth  [or  did]  so  is  certain,  because  He  saith  He 


Il6          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

doth  [or  did] ;  and  that  this  is  just  in  Him  to  do  so,  is  also  certain  therefore, 
because  He  doth  it.  For  as  His  laws  are  our  measures,  so  His  actions  and 
His  own  will  are  His  own  measures.  He  that  hath  right  over  all  things  and 
all  persons,  cannot  do  wrong  to  any  thing.  He  that  is  essentially  just,  it  is 
impossible  for  him  to  be  unjust  "  (Jeremy  Taylor's  Sermon  on  "  The  Entail 
of  Curses  cut  off  "). 

keeping  pure  and  entire — Flavel's  warning  not  to  invent  ceremonies  to 
make  God's  institutions  "more  decent  than  Christ  left  them,"  should  be 
laid  to  heart  and  pondered  by  those  who  have  the  charge  of  public  worship. 

For 

"  'Tis  mad  idolatry 
To  make  the  service  greater  than  the  god." 

appointed  in  his  word.  "  Particularly  prayer  and  thanksgiving  in  the  name 
of  Christ ;  the  reading,  preaching,  and  hearing  of  the  word  ;  the  administra 
tion  and  receiving  of  the  sacraments  ;  Church  government  and  discipline  ; 
the  ministry  and  maintenance  thereof;  religious  fasting;  swearing  by  the 
name  of  God,  and  vowing  unto  Him  "  (Larger  Catechism). 

forbiddeth  the  worshipping  of  God  by  images — The  theological  student 
will  search  in  vain  in  the  Catechism  of  the  Council  of  Trent  for  the  second 
"commandment.  He  will  find  ten  commandments  in  that  authorized  and 
imposed  symbol  of  the  Popish  Church,  but  the  Decalogue  is  made  up  by  the 
division  of  the  tenth  commandment  into  two.  "The  natural  and  obvious 
meaning  of  the  second  commandment  is,  that  God  there,  in  regulating  tha 
mode  in  which  He  is  to  be  worshipped,  forbids  the  making  of  the  likeness  of 
any  object  with  the  mew  of  introdttcing  this  likeness  into  religions  worship,  or 
paying  unto  it  any  of  the  external  marks  of  religious  honour  and  veneration. 
And  so  sensible  are  Romanists  that  this  is  the  natural  and  obvious  meaning 
of  the  second  commandment,  that  they  have  been  accustomed  to  exclude 
it  wholly,  while  professing  to  quote  the  Decalogue,  from  the  Catechisms 
commonly  used  in  the  instruction  of  their  people"  (Cunningham,  i.  377). 
How  far  popular  Romanism  has  declined  not  only  from  apostolic  spirituality 
in  public  worship,  but  even  from  that  of  the  Old  Testament,  any  one  who  has 
seen  a  modern  Popish  cathedral  or  chapel,  and  will  compare  it  with  the 
following  testimonies,  will  see.  Milman  tells  us  that  the  heathen  world 
beheld  with  astonishment  a  whole  race  whose  deity  was  represented  under  no 
visible  form  or  likeness.  The  conqueror  Pompey,  when  he  entered  the 
violated  temple,  was  filled  with  wonder  at  finding  the  sanctuary  without 
image  or  emblem  of  the  deity  :  and  Tacitus,  "  the  philosophic  historian, 
whose  profound  mind  seems  struggling,  with  hostile  prejudices,  defines,  with 
his  own  inimitable  compression  of  language,  the  doctrine,  to  the  sublimity  of 
which  he  has  closed  his  eyes.  The  worship  of  the  Jews,  he  says,  is  purely 
mental ;  they  acknowledge  but  one  God,— and  that  God  supreme  and  eternal, 
neither  changeable  nor  perishable." 

The  reasons  annexed — In  his  learned  sermon  Of  the  Nature  of  Pride, 
Hooker  has  an  introductory  passage  which  will  be  the  best  note  on  the  annex 
ing  of  reasons  to  a  commandment :  "The  nature  of  man,  being  much  more 
delighted  to  be  led  than  drawn,  doth  many  times  stubbornly  resist  authority, 
when  to  persuasion  it  easily  yieldeth.  A  law  simply  commanding  or  forbidding, 
is  but  dead  in  comparison  of  that  which  expresseth  the  reason  wherefore  it  doth 
the  one  or  the  other.  And,  surely,  even  in  the  laws  of  God,  although  that 
He  hath  given  commandment  be  in  itself  a  reason  sufficient  to  exact  all 


THE   SECOND   COMMANDMENT.  1 17 

obedience  at  the  hands  of  men,  yet  a  forcible  inducement  it  is  to  obey  with 
greater  alacrity  and  cheerfulness  of  mind,  when  we  see  plainly  that  nothing  is 
imposed  upon  us  more  than  we  must  needs  yield  unto,  except  we  will  be 
unreasonable.  In  a  word,  whatsoever  we  be  taught,  be  it  precept  for 
direction  of  our  manners,  or  article  for  instruction  of  our  faith,  or  document 
any  way  for  information  of  our  minds,  it  then  taketh  root  and  abideth,  when 
we  conceive  not  only  what  God  doth  speak,  but  why." 

The  reasons  annexed  to  the  second  commandment  as  here  drawn  out  are 
three — (i)  God's  sovereignty  over  us  ;  He  is  our  King,  and  we  are  His 
subjects,  and  therefore  we  are  bound  to  obey  His  laws  :  (2)  His  propriety  in 
us — an  obsolete  form  ;  property  has  taken  its  place  in  modern  English — His 
property  in  us  ;  we  belong  to  Him,  He  created  us,  and  He  hath  redeemed 
us,  and  therefore  we  are  not  our  own,  least  of  all  in  our  worship  of  our 
Maker  and  Redeemer  :  and  (3)  the  zeal  or  jealousy  He  has  to  His  own 
worship.  The  prophets  and  psalmists  are  full  of  that  zeal  and  jealousy.  For 
example,  Isa.  i.  10-15;  Ezek.  xiv.  l-n. 

USES. — i.  Though  we  do  not  build  our  places  of  worship  with  niches  to 
hold  images,  yet  this  commandment  is  not  on  that  account  an  obsolete 
precept,  or  the  study  of  it  the  study  of  an  antiquarian  topic.  The 
iconoclastic  Puritanism  of  our  fathers  removed  the  temptation  to  idolatry 
from  us.  But  they  bequeathed  to  us  a  very  spiritual  law, — a  law  that 
does  not  so  much  search  our  sanctuaries  for  statues  and  images  as  it 
turns  its  scrutiny  into  our  own  hearts.  "Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the 
temple  of  God,  and  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  you?  If  any 
man  defile  the  temple  of  God,  him  shall  God  destroy  ;  for  the  temple  of 
God  is  holy,  which  temple  ye  are." 

2.  But  if  the  law  against  images  in  divine  worship  came  by  Moses,  then 
the  grace  that  obviates  the  supposed  necessity  for  them, — the  grace  that 
meets  and  answers  the  craving  in  the  human  heart  to   see  God,  that 
grace  came  by  Jesus  Christ.     For  it  is  one  of  the  noblest  and  most  ex 
pressive  of  the  scriptural  titles  of  our  Lord  to  call  Him  the  Image  of  God. 
For  just  as  a  man's  face  is  the  image  of  his  soul ;  just  as  we  address 
ourselves  to  a  man's  face  in  addressing  his  mind  and  heart ;  so  is  it  when 
we  seek  God  in  Christ.      "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time  ;  the  only 
begotten  Son  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  He  hath  declared  him." 

3.  "The  sins  of  fathers  descend  very  often  to  their  children,  both  in  the 
way  of  nature,   that  the  children   inherit   strong   temptations   to   their 
father's  sins ;  and  by  way  of  example,  that  they  greedily  imitate,  and 
often  exaggerate  them.     Wouldest  thou  not  have  children  whom  thou 
wouldest  wish  unborn,  reform  thyself.  .  .  .  Parents  who  are  careless  as 
to  themselves,  and  as  to  their  own  lives,  still  long  that  their  children 
should  not  be  as  themselves  "  (Pusey). 

4.  "  I  am  to  consider  what  remedies  there  are  for  sons  to  cut  off  the  entail 
of  curses.  .  .  .  The  heirs  and  sons  of  families  are  to  remove  from  their 
house  the  curse  descending  from  their  father's   loins — (i)  by  acts  dis 
avowing  the  sins  of  their  ancestors  ;  (2)  by  praying  for  pardon  ;  (3)  by 
being  humbled  for  them ;  (4)  by  renouncing  the  example  ;  (5)  quitting 
the  affection  to  the  crimes ;  (6)  by  not  imitating  the  actions  in  kind, 
semblance,   or  similitude ;  and  lastly  (7)  by  refusing  to  rejoice  in  the 
ungodly  purchases,  in  which  their  '  fathers  did  amiss,  and  dealt  wickedly '  " 
(Jeremy  Taylor). 


Il8          THE   SHORTER    CATECHISM   WITH    A   COMMENTARY. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Note  the  nine  Biblical  senses  of  the  word  image  as  they  are  classified  and  illus 
trated  by  Cruden, 

2.  How  would  you  meet  the  objection  that  the  Jews  in  later  times  took  against  all 
painting  and  sculpture  from  their  commandment  ? 

3.  Remark  on  Hausrath's  statement,  ii.  4 :  The  Semite  is  a  man  without  any  sense 
for  art,  otherwise  his  laws  would  never  have  forbidden  him  to  make  images  and 
symbols. 

4.  Derive  and  explain  the  theological  terms  anthropomorphism  and  anthropopathy, 
and  point  out  how  these  terms  apply  to  the  contents  of  this  commandment. 

5.  Derive  iconoclast.     To  whom   is  the  saying  popularly  attributed :  Pull  down  the 
nests,  and  the  rooks  will  fly  away? 

6.  What  may  be  inferred  from  hence  ?    Hence  we  learn,  that  spiritual  worship 
is  most  agreeable  to  God's  nature  and  will;  and  the  more  spiritual  it  is,  the 
more  acceptable  it  will  be  to  Him  (John  iu.   24).    Externals  in  worship  are  of 
little  regard  with  God ;   as  places,  habits,  gestures,   etc.    Apply  this  :   First,  to 
superstitious  men  (Isa.  Ixvi.  1,  2,  3);   Secondly,  to  children   that  say  a  prayer,  but 
mind  not  to  whom,  nor  what  they  say  (Flauel). 

7.  Calvin  warns  against  importing  things   into   the  worship  of  God  that  are  full  of 
display,  but  have  no  solidity.    Apply  this  criticism,  and  giue  illustrations. 

8.  His  propriety  in  us.     Explain   Dr.    John   Duncan's  comment:  God  cannot  bo 
injured,  but  He  may  be  wronged. 


Q.  53.    Which  is  the  third  commandment? 

A.  The  third  commandment  is,  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name 
of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain :  for  the  Lord  will  not  hold  him  guilt 
less  that  taketh  his  name  in  vam.n 

Q.  54.    What  is  required  in  the  third  commandment^ 

A.  The  third  commandment  requireth  the  holy  and  reverent  use 
of  God's  names,0  titles, p  attributes,^  ordinances,1  word,8  and  works.* 

n  Ex.  xx.  7.- 

0  Matt.  vi.  9 :  After  this  manner  therefore  pray  ye  :  Our  Father  which  art  in 
heaven,  Hallowed  be  thy  name.     Deut.  xxviii.  58  :  If  thou  wilt  not  observe  to  do 
all  the  words  of  this  law  that  are  written  in  this  book,  that  thou  mayest  fear  this 
glorious  and  fearful  name,  THE  LORD  THY  GOD. 

P  Ps.  Ixviii.  4  :  Sing  unto  God,  sing  praises  to  his  name :  extol  him  that  rideth 
upon  the  heavens  by  his  name  JAH,  and  rejoice  before  him. 

1  Rev.  xv.  3  :  And  they  sing  the  song  of  Moses  the  servant  of  God,  and  the 
song  of  the  Lamb,  saying,  Great  and  marvellous  are  thy  works,   Lord  God 
Almighty  ;  just  and  true  are  thy  ways,  thou  King  of  saints.     Ver.  4  :  Who  shall 
not  fear  thee,  O  Lord,  and  glorify  thy  name  ?  for  thou  only  art  holy. 

r  Mai.  i.  ii :  For  from  the  rising  of  the  sun,  even  unto  the  going  down  of  the 
same,  my  name  shall  be  great  among  the  Gentiles  ;  and  in  every  place  incense 
shall  be  offered  unto  my  name,  and  a  pure  offering  :  for  my  name  shall  be  great 
among  the  heathen,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.  Ver.  14 :  But  cursed  be  the  deceiver, 
which  hath  in  his  flock  a  male,  and  voweth,  and  sacrificeth  unto  the  Lord,  a 
corrupt  thing :  for  I  am  a  great  King,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  my  name  is 
dreadful  among  the  heathen. 

8  Ps.  cxxxviii.  2 :  I  will  worship  toward  thy  holy  temple,  and  praise  thy  name 
for  thy  loving-kindness,  and  for  thy  truth :  for  thou  hast  magnified  thy  \vord 
above  all  thy  name. 

*  Job  xxxvi.  24  :  Remember  that  thou  magnify  his  work,  which  men  behold. 


THE   THIRD   COMMANDMENT.  119 

Q.  55.    What  is  forbidden  in  the  third  commandment '? 

A.  The  third  commandment  forbiddeth  all  profaning  or 
abusing  of  any  thing  whereby  God  maketh  himself  known.11 

Q.  56.    What  is  the  reason  annexed  to  the  third  commandment '•? 

A.  The  reason  annexed  to  the  third  commandment  is,  That 
however  the  breakers  of  this  commandment  may  escape  punish 
ment  from  men,  yet  the  Lord  our  God  will  not  suffer  them  to 
escape  his  righteous  judgment/ 

u  Mai.  i.  6 :  A  son  honoureth  his  father,  and  a  servant  his  master :  if  then  I  be 
a  father,  where  is  mine  honour  ?  and  if  I  be  a  master,  where  is  my  fear  ?  saith  the 
Lord  of  hosts  unto  you,  O  priests,  that  despise  my  name.  And  ye  say,  Wherein 
have  we  despised  thy  name  ?  Ver.  7  :  Ye  offer  polluted  bread  upon  mine  altar  ; 
and  ye  say,  Wherein  have  we  polluted  thee  ?  In  that  ye  say,  The  table  of  the 
Lord  is  contemptible.  Ver.  12 :  But  ye  have  profaned  it,  in  that  ye  say,  The  table 
of  the  Lord  is  polluted  ;  and  the  fruit  thereof,  even  his  meat,  is  contemptible. 
Mai.  ii.  2 :  If  ye  will  not  hear,  and  if  ye  will  not  lay  it  to  heart,  to  give  glory  unto 
my  name,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  I  will  even  send  a  curse  upon  you,  and  I  will 
curse  your  blessings  ;  yea,  I  have  cursed  them  already,  because  ye  do  not  lay  it  to 
heart.  Mai.  iii.  14 :  Ye  have  said,  It  is  vain  to  serve  God  ;  and  what  profit  is  it 
that  we  have  kept  his  ordinance,  and  that  we  have  walked  mournfully  before  the 
Lord  of  hosts  ? 

v  i  Sam.  ii.  12 :  Now  the  sons  of  Eli  were  sons  of  Belial ;  they  knew  not  the 
Lord.  Ver.  17  :  Wherefore  the  sin  of  the  young  men  was  very  great  before  the 
Lord  ;  for  men  abhorred  the  offering  of  the  Lord.  Ver.  29 :  Wherefore  kick  ye 
at  my  sacrifice,  and  at  mine  offering,  which  I  have  commanded  in  my  habitation  ; 
and  honourest  thy  sons  above  me,  to  make  yourselves  fat  with  the  chiefest  of  all 
the  offerings  of  Israel  my  people?  i  Sam.  iii.  13:  For  I  have  told  him,  that  I  will 
judge  his  house  for  ever,  for  the  iniquity  which  he  knoweth  ;  because  his  sons 
made  themselves  vile,  and  he  restrained  them  not.  Deut.  xxviii.  58  :  If  thou  wilt 
not  observe  to  do  all  the  words  of  this  law  that  are  written  in  this  book,  that  thou 
mayest  fear  this  glorious  and  fearful  name,  THE  LORD  THY  GOD  ;  Ver.  59  : 
Then  the  Lord  will  make  thy  plagues  wonderful,  and  the  plagues  of  thy  seed, 
even  great  plagues,  and  of  long  continuance,  and  sore  sicknesses,  and  of  long 
continuance. 

Tliou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain — The  first 
commandment  teaches  us  that  Jehovah  is  God  alone  :  He  has  no  equal  and 
no  rival.  The  second  commandment  goes  on  to  instruct  us  that  God  is  a 
spirit,  and  that  we  are  not  to  set  up  any  supposed  similitude  of  God  before 
our  eyes.  He  has  no  shape  or  similitude,  but  He  has  a  Name.  That  is  to 
say,  He  has  taken  a  name  to  Himself  under  which  He  wills  that  we  know 
Him,  think  of  Him,  speak  of  Him,  and  address  ourselves  to  Him.  And 
accordingly  He  issued  through  Moses  this  warning  commandment,  the 
third.  "  The  literal  meaning  of  this  command  is  doubtful.  It  may  mean, 
Thou  shalt  not  utter  the  name  of  God  in  a  vain  and  irreverent  manner  ;  or, 
Thou  shalt  not  utter  the  name  of  God  to  a  lie,  thou  shalt  not  swear  falsely. 
It  is  urged  as  an  objection  to  the  second  interpretation,  that  perjury  is  an 
offence  against  our  neighbour,  and  therefore  belongs  to  the  second  table  of 
the  law  :  and  that  it  is  in  fact  included  in  f;<e  ninth  commandment,  Thou 
shalt  not  bear  false  witness  against  thy  neighbour.  Bearing  false  testimony 
and  false  swearing  arc,  however,  different  offences  "  (Hodge). 


120          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH    A    COMMENTARY. 

in  vain.  "  I  suppose  the  primary  meaning  of  the  phrase  points  to  in- 
differentism  at  least  as  obviously  as  to  antagonism.  '  In  vain  '  suggests  not 
irreverence  only,  but  voidness,  nothingness,  the  bringing  in  for  no  cause  but 
to  round  a  sentence  or  fill  up  a  gap,  of  that  Name  which  was  proclaimed 
before  Moses  in  majesty  and  mercy  ;  to  utter  simply  for  the  sake  of  saying 
something,  that  Name  which  Isaiah  foresaw  as  coming  from  far  burning  with 
divine  anger.  It  is  to  pronounce  that  Name  as  though  it  were  a  mere  word, 
not  standing  for  any  person,  to  bring  it  in  when  another  word  would  actually 
serve  our  purpose  as  well "  (Christina  Rossetti). 

Note. — Oaths. — An  oath  is  a  solemn  appeal  taken  from  the  weakness, 
untruthfulness,  and  mistrust  of  men  to  the  omniscience,  truth,  and  power  of 
God.  At  bottom  all  oaths  are  of  the  same  nature  and  design,  and  they  come 
into  use  in  this  way.  If  I  am  forming  any  important  engagement,  and  my 
self-interest  leans  against  the  likelihood  of  my  performing  it :  or  if  I  am 
called  to  bear  witness  or  give  judgment  in  a  matter  that  tests  my  integrity, 
and  if  my  neighbour  doubts  my  will,  my  ability,  my  sincerity,  then,  conscious 
of  all  these  in  myself,  I  am  permitted  to  swear  by  the  name  of  God  that 
I  am  true  in  my  words,  and  just  in  my  judgments,  and  sincere  in  my  purposes. 
In  taking  an  oath  for  his  assurance,  I  as  good  as  say  to  my  neighbour  :  Were 
*his  matter  between  you  and  me  only,  the  temptation  to  me  rising  out  of  it 
might  be  too  strong  for  me ;  but  since  this  transaction  is  so  important  for  you, 
to  give  you  the  best  possible  security  I  can  supply,  I  hereby  carry  this  trans 
action  into  the  presence  of  God  :  I  hereby  open  my  whole  mind  and  heart  in 
this  matter  to  Him,  and  I  solemnly  affirm  that  as  He  is  just  and  true  in  all 
His  ways,  so  am  I  in  this  thing  ;  and  that  as  He  will  bring  every  secret  thing 
to  judgment,  so  I  protest  to  you  against  that  day  that  there  is  nothing  false 
or  unjust  in  my  mind  or  heart  toward  you.  I  know  that  of  every  word  I 
speak  now  I  shall  have  to  give  an  account  at  last ;  and  I  swear  to  you  that  I 
am  speaking  nothing  now  that  I  will  repent  of  when  I  meet  you  before  God 
in  judgment. 

Now  all  this,  instead  of  being  doubtful  or  wrong,  is  both  most  rational  and 
indeed  religious.  It  is  most  rational  in  that  it  accepts  the  facts  and  con 
ditions  of  human  life,  as  these  facts  and  conditions  are  found  in  ourselves, 
and  in  our  fellows  around  us.  For  an  oath  enables  a  weak,  self-seeking,  self- 
sheltering  creature  to  take  up  a  firm,  open,  and  honourable  stand  both 
toward  himself  and  toward  his  neighbour.  It  enables  a  man  to  meet  the 
most  difficult  duties  and  most  searching  demands  of  this  life  with  his  mind 
girt  about  with  a  strongly- wrought  girdle  of  truth. 

Nor  does  the  Confession  of  Faith  go  any  too  far  when  it  teaches  that  "a 
lawful  oath  is  a  part  of  religious  worship."  The  Confession  indeed  but 
borrows  Calvin's  very  words.  "An  oath,"  he  says,  "when  duly  taken,  is 
a  species  of  divine  worship."  Which  it  surely  is,  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  most 
solemn  acknowledgment  of  God  as  our  lawgiver  and  our  judge.  It  openly 
acknowledges  His  omnipresence,  omniscience,  justice,  and  power.  It 
connects  the  second  table  of  His  law  most  closely  with  the  first.  It  confesses 
also,  that  my  neighbour  has  but  too  good  reason  to  fear  that  I  do  not  love  him 
as  I  love  myself ;  it  is  a  confession  that  my  heart  and  lip  are  not  necessarily 
above  suspicion,  and  that  I  do  not  rebel  against  giving  any  legitimate 
guarantee  that  may  help  to  secure  my  just  and  honourable  treatment  of  my 
neighbour,  and  my  jealous  and  conscientious  watchfulness  over  myself.  And 
the  oath  rises  above  both  of  us  in  that  it  binds  fast  the  engagements  of  moral 


THE  THIRD    COMMANDMENT.  121 

and  social  life  to  the  throne  of  divine  righteousness  and  truth.  When  a  man 
takes  an  oath  in  the  name  of  God,  he  at  once  humbles  and  ennobles  himself 
thereby.  He  humbles  himself,  in  that  he  takes  his  place  among  a  race  of 
fallen  and  false-hearted  men ;  among  men  hateful  and  hating  one  another  ; 
deceitful  and  deceiving  one  another.  And  he  ennobles  himself,  in  that  he 
acknowledges  his  evil  nature  and  kinship,  and  at  the  same  time  seeks  divine 
help,  and  promises,  with  God's  help,  to  speak  only  what  is  true,  and  to  do 
only  what  is  right.  An  oath  accordingly,  in  the  mouth  of  a  devout  juror,  is 
nothing  less  than  an  act  of  divine  worship.  It  turns  a  court  of  justice  for 
the  time  into  a  church,  and  elevates  its  solemn  procedure  into  an  earthly 
figure  and  forecast  of  the  day  of  judgment. 

But  we  are  not  left  to  our  own  reasonings  to  guide  and  vindicate  our 
practice  in  this  matter  of  oaths.  The  Scriptures  afford  us  endless  examples, 
and  some  of  them  examples  of  the  most  solemn  kind,  of  this  method  of 
ascertaining  and  reassuring  the  doubtful  and  anxious  mind.  At  the  very 
opening  of  the  Hebrew  history,  Jehovah  Himself  swears  by  His  own  awful 
Name  that  He  will  perform  to  His  people  such  and  such  things  that  con 
fessedly  lie  beyond  the  pale  of  past  experience  and  future  likelihood.  And 
when  the  things  so  promised  were  actually  accomplished,  they  were  thus 
celebrated  in  a  psalm  :  "O  ye  seed  of  Abraham  His  servant  ;  ye  children 
of  Jacob  His  children  :  remember  the  covenant  made  with  Abraham,  and 
His  oath  unto  Israel ;  He  confirmed  the  same  to  Jacob  for  a  law,  and  to  Israel 
for  an  everlasting  covenant."  Again:  "Jehovah  hath  sworn,  and  will  not 
repent,  Thou  art  a  priest  for  ever,  after  *the  order  of  Melchizedek. "  And 
again  :  "  For  men  verily  sweat'  by  the  greater,  and  an  oath,  for  confirmation 
is  an  end  of  all  strife.  Wherefore  God,  willing  more  abundantly  to  show 
unto  the  heirs  of  salvation  the  immutability  of  His  counsel,  confirmed  it  by  an 
oath."  And  our  Lord  also,  when  put  on  oath  before  the  high  priest,  took 
the  adjuration  as  made  under  the  law,  and  thus  both  recognized  and  established 
the  lawfulness  and  propriety  of  the  judicial  custom.  All  which  is  surely 
sufficient  to  disprove  the  somewhat  fanatical  position  that  oaths  are  unlawful ; 
that  judicial  swearing  is  a  breach  of  the  third  commandment. 

But  it  will  to  a  certainty  occur  to  some  readers  to  say  at  this  point,  What 
then  is  to  be  made  of  our  Lord's  words  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount, 
"  I  say  unto  you,  Swear  not  at  all :  neither  by  heaven  ;  for  it  is  God's  throne  : 
nor  by  the  earth  ;  for  it  is  His  footstool :  but  let  your  communication  be  Yea, 
yea  ;  Nay,  nay  :  for  whatsoever  is  more  than  these  cometh  of  evil "  ?  That  is 
a  most  instructive  example  of  our  Lord's  popular  teaching,  but  it  has  little  or 
nothing  to  do  with  the  matter  in  hand.  He  is  here  dealing  with  one  of  the 
most  common  vices  among  His  fellow-countrymen.  The  whole  sermon,  and 
eminently  this  part  of  it,  is  directed  against  the  perversions  and  exaggerations, 
the  glosses  and  refinements  under  which  it  may  almost  be  said  the  moral  law 
lay  buried  in  our  Lord's  day  ;  and  hence  the  paradoxical  and  startling  words 
He  sometimes  makes  use  of,  as  if  just  to  set  men  to  think  what  the  law  of  God 
really  is,  and  what  obedience  to  it  really  implies.  And  accordingly  our  Lord 
is  not  so  much  dealing  in  the  passage  quoted  with  the  legal  practice  of  courts 
of  justice,  or  even  with  the  solemn  assurances  exchanged  between  man  and 
man  among  the  important  concerns  of  daily  life,  as  with  the  too  familiar  and 
irreverent  use  of  God's  name  and  attributes  in  their  common  conversation. 
And  besides,  the  casuistical  teaching  of  the  ecclesiastical  schools  had  laid 
down  a  mass  of  entangling,  vexatious,  and  demoralizing  rules,  measuring  out 
the  degrees  of  responsibility  and  solemnity  that  attached  to  this  and  that  form 


122          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

of  oath.  Swearing  by  heaven  meant  so  much  ;  swearing  by  the  temple  meant 
so  much  ;  swearing  by  one  thing  you  were  not  absolutely  bound  to  keep  your 
word  ;  while  swearing  by  another  kept  you  firm, — all  this  was  sapping  the 
foundations  of  truth  and  reverence  in  the  land,  and  it  was  against  all  such 
rabbinical  glosses  and  popular  abuses  of  the  third  commandment  that  our 
Lord  thus  emphatically  protested. 

The  third  commandment  requireth  the  holy  and  reverent  use  of  God's 
names,  etc. — "  Men  do  not  begin  by  intending  to  dishonour  God  ;  but  they 
are  afraid  of  the  ridicule  of  others  ;  they  are  ashamed  of  appearing  religious, 
and  thus^they  are  led  to  pretend  that  they  are  worse  than  they  really  are.  .  .  . 
They  think  contemptuously  of  God's  ministers,  sacraments,  and  worship  j 
they  slight  His  word,  rarely  looking  into  it,  and  never  studying  it.  Thus 
they  are  in  heart  infidels ;  though  they  may  not  formally  be  such,  and  may 
attempt  to  disguise  their  own  unbelief  under  pretence  of  objecting  to  one  or 
other  of  the  doctrines  or  ordinances  of  religion.  And  should  a  time  of 
temptation  come,  when  it  would  be  safe  to  show  themselves  as  they  really 
are,  they  will  almost  unawares  throw  off  their  profession  of  Christianity,  and 
join  themselves  to  the  scoffing  world  "  (Newman). 

forbiddetli  all  profaning — This  commandment  among  other  things 
denounces  the  sinful  and  degrading  habit  of  profane  cursing  and  sivcaring. 
It  is  distressing  to  think  of  the  hold  this  coarse  and  vulgar  habit  has  taken  of 
certain  classes  of  the  people.  You  can  scarcely  pass  a  field  in  seed-time  or 
harvest,  you  will  not  walk  far  along  any  frequented  highway  without  hearing 
men  uttering  savage  bursts  of  cursing  at  the  mute  creatures  God  has  given 
them  to  assist  them  in  their  work,  and  even  at  the  very  implements  they  hold 
in  their  hands.  In  every  knot  of  workmen  there  are  usually  some  whose 
mother-tongue  is  blasphemy,  whose  mouth  is  filled  with  cursing  and  bitter 
ness.  And  sometimes  seriously-minded  men,  such  is  the  strength  of  example, 
or  of  an  early  bad  habit,  will  be  surprised  into  this  lamentable  language,  and 
that  long  after  they  have  begun  to  set  a  watch  on  the  door  of  their  lips. 
Peter's  explosion  in  the  palace  of  the  high  priest  is  no  doubt  an  example  of 
the  long  survival  of  an  early  evil  habit.  "  Once,"  says  Bunyan,  in  his  Grace 
Abounding,  "when  I  was  in  the  height  of  vanity,  yet  hearing  one  to  swear 
that  was  reckoned  for  a  religious  man,  it  had  so  great  a  stroke  upon  my 
spirit  that  it  made  my  heart  to  ake. "  We  have  reason  to  be  thankful  that 
this  sinful  and  indecent  habit  has  almost  entirely  disappeared  from  among 
educated  men.  For  there  are  certain  kinds  of  historical  and  social  literature 
that  survive  to  show  us  how  common  and  almost  universal  this  abominable 
practice  was  at  one  time  even  among  the  more  cultivated  classes  of  society. 
Addressing  working  men  in  the  twentieth  letter  of  Fors  Clavigera,  Mr. 
Ruskin  says :  "I  wish  you  to  think  over  the  meaning  of  this  habit  of  yours 
very  carefully  with  me.  I  call  it  a  habit  ot yours,  observe,  only  with  reference 
to  your  recent  adoption  of  it.  You  have  learned  it  from  your  superiors  ;  but 
they,  partly  in  consequence  of  your  too  eager  imitation  of  them,  are  beginning 
to  mend  their  manners.  .  .  .  And  first,  it  is  necessary  you  should  understand 
the  difference  between  swearing  and  cursing,  vulgarly  so  often  confounded. 
They  are  entirely  different  things  ;  the  first  is  invoking  the  witness  of  a  spirit 
to  an  assertion  you  make,  the  second  is  invoking  the  assistance  of  a  spirit  to  a 
mischief  you  wish  to  inflict.  When  ill-educated  and  ill-tempered  people 
clamorously  confound  the  two  invocations,  they  are  not,  in  reality,  either 
cursing  or  swearing,  but  merely  vomiting  empty  words  indecently.  True 


THE   THIRD    COMMANDMENT.  123 

cursing  and  swearing  must  always  be  distinct  and  solemn."  And  Dr.  Newman 
calls  all  this  kind  of  language  ' {  a  sort  of  vocal  worship  of  the  evil  one,  to 
which  he  listens  with  especial  satisfaction.  He  is  a  master  who  allows  him 
self  to  be  served  without  trembling.  He  goes  to  and  fro  upon  the  earth,  and 
walks  up  and  down  in  it,  hearing  and  rejoicing  in  that  light  and  profane  talk 
which  is  his  worship." 

or  abusing  of  anything  whereby  God  maketh  himself  known.     The 

Bible  word  blasphemy  is  just  Greek  for  this  which  is  forbidden  in  this 
commandment.  And  Bengel  excellently  defines  blasphemy  thus :  "Blasphemy 
is  committed  when  (i)  anything  unworthy  of  God  is  attributed  to  Him  ; 
(2)  when  things  worthy  of  God  are  denied  to  Him ;  (3)  when  the  incom 
municable  attributes  of  God  are  attributed  to  others." 

God  will  not  suffer  them  to  escape  his  righteous  judgment.  "Jehovah 
alone,  according  to  the  ancient  constitution,  was  King  in  Israel,  so  that  the 
crime  of  high  treason  could  only  be  committed  in  respect  of  Him,  and  as  the 
ten  commandments  would  lead  us  to  expect,  the  penalty  for  blaspheming  His 
name  was  death.  The  book  of  Leviticus  (xxiv.)  relates  how  on  one  occasion 
a  semi-Israelite  in  a  brawl  reviled  and  cursed  His  NAME,  and  how  the 
community,  shocked  at  the  unlooked-for  event,  sought  counsel  of  the  oracle, 
and  how  this  commanded  the  man  to  be  stoned  "  (Ewald,  Antiquities]. 

USES. — I.  The  holy  and  reverent  use  of  God's  name  "  implies  right  faith 
to  call  upon  Him  as  He  Is  ;  right  trust  in  Him,  leaning  upon  Him ; 
right  devotion,  calling  upon  Him  as  He  has  appointed ;  right  life,  our 
selves  who  call  upon  Him  being,  or  becoming  by  His  grace,  what  He 
wills"  (Pusey  on  Joel  ii.  32). 

2.  "  Whenever  you  hear  the  name  of  God  mentioned,  accustom  yourselves 
to  make  a  reverential  pause,  and  form  within  yourselves  an  inward  act  of 
adoration,  whereby  you  will  be  less  apt  to  profane  that  venerable  name 
in  your  more  solemn  addresses  "  (A  Father's  Advice  to  his  Children}. 

3.  Certain  classes  of  men  have  already  been  named  whose  transgression  of 
this  commandment  is  notorious  and   scandalous.     But   this   command 
ment,  like  all  God's  commandments,  is  very  broad  and  very  spiritual. 
And  those  who  are  farthest  from  the  profane  habits  of  speech  referred  to 
may  fall  into  another  profanity  not  less  displeasing  to  God  and  injurious 
to  themselves.     There  is  a  professional,  a  familiar,  a  conventional  way 
of  addressing  God  in  prayer  and  praise,  as  also  in  speaking  of  Him  in 
preaching  and  writing  and  debating,  that  is  a  grievous  breach  of  this  holy 
commandment.      "We  are  apt  to  act  toward  God  and  the  things  of  God 
as  toward  a  mere  system,  a  law,  a  name,  a  religion,  a  principle  ;  not  as 
against  a  Person,  a  living,  watchful,  present,  prompt  and  powerful  Eye 
and  Arm.      That  all  this  is  a  great  error  is  olain   to   all  who  study 
Scripture"  (Newman). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Comment  on  and  illustrate  Eccles.  v.  1,  2,    Draw  out  and  justify  the  first  clause 
of  Confession  xxii.  1. 

2.  And,  indeed,  oath-taking  seems  to  imply,  in  its  principle  and   origin,  that 
other  simple   assertions   are   less  sacred   and  binding,   and   thus   indirectly  to 
exercise  an  injurious  influence  upon  the   moral  and  religious  notions   of  the 
people  (Katisch).    Compare  with  the  teaching  in  the  Commentary,  and  judge. 


124          THE    SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

3.  Explain,  in  view  of  the  comments  on  this  and  on  the  frst    and   second   com 
mandments,  Matthew  Henry's  words:  God  is  known  by  His  name  only,  not  by  His 
nature  or  any  similitude. 

4.  The  formula,  which  embodies  a  dogma  for  the  theologian,  readily  suggests 
an  object  for  the  worshipper.    Ponder  and  explain. 


Q.  57.    Which  is  the  fourth  commandment '? 

A.  The  fourth  commandment  is,  Remember  the  sabbath  day,  to 
keep  it  holy.  Six  days  shalt  thou  labour,  and  do  all  thy  work : 
but  the  seventh  day  is  the  sabbath  of  the  Lord  thy  God :  in  it  thou 
shalt  not  do  any  work,  thou,  nor  thy  son,  nor  thy  daughter,  thy 
man-servant,  nor  thy  maid-servant,  nor  thy  cattle,  nor  thy  stranger 
that  is  within  thy  gates :  for  in  six  days  the  Lord  made  heaven  and 
earth,  the  sea,  and  all  that  in  them  is,  and  rested  the  seventh  day  : 
wherefore  the  Lord  blessed  the  sabbath  day,  and  hallowed  it.™ 

Q.  58.    WJiat  is  required  in  the  fourth  commandment '? 

A.  The  fourth  commandment  requireth  the  keeping  holy  to 
God  such  set  times  as  he  hath  appointed  in  his  word;  expressly 
one  whole  day  in  seven,  to  be  a  holy  sabbath  to  himself.x 


w  Ex.  xx.  8-1 1. 

x  Deut.  v.  12 :  Keep  the  sabbath  day  to  sanctify  it,  as  the  Lord  thy  God  hath 
commanded  thee.  Ver.  13  :  Six  days  thou  shalt  labour,  and  do  all  thy  work  ; 
Ver.  14 :  But  the  seventh  day  is  the  sabbath  of  the  Lord  thy  God  :  in  it  thou  shalt 
not  do  any  work. 


Remember  the  sabbath  day — Sabbath  is  from  the  Hebrew  Shabath,  to 
rest,  the  day  of  rest,  the  Sabbath  day.  This  name  is  the  most  ancient  name 
of  the  day,  and  till  New  Testament  times  it  was  the  only  scriptural  and 
ecclesiastical  name.  The  Lord's  day  is  the  New  Testament  and  Christian 
name  (Rev.  i.  10).  In  the  early  Church  the  weekly  commemoration  of 
Christ's  resurrection  was  observed  on  that  day,  hence  the  Greek  Church  still 
calls  it  Resurrection  day.  Another  familiar  name  of  the  day  is  Sunday. 
This  is  an  astrological  and  heathen  designation,  and  comes  down  from  times 
when  Sol  or  Apollo,  the  Sun  god,  was  worshipped  on  that  day  of  the  week, 
just  as  Saturn  was  worshipped  on  Saturday  and  the  Moon  on  Monday.  The 
Puritans  and  Presbyterians  tried  hard  to  get  this  pagan  title  removed  from 
the  first  day  of  the  week,  but  in  this  as  in  many  other  things  they  were 
overborne.  In  their  own  Confessions  and  Catechisms,  however,  they  use  the 
only  defensible  names,  Christian  Sabbath  or  Lord's  day. 

The  Sabbath  day  is  the  oldest  religious  institution  in  the  world.  It 
existed  long  ages  before  the  Mosaic  legislation,  into  which  it  was  afterwards 
incorporated.  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  circumcision  and  the  Passover, 
public  worship,  nay,  the  Holy  Scriptures  themselves,  all  these  ordinances  and 
possessions  are  ancient  and  venerable,  but  none  of  them  all  can  compare  with 
the  Sabbath  day  for  hoary  antiquity.  It  is  the  noble  and  beautiful  representa 
tion  of  the  most  ancient  page  of  Scripture,  a  representation,  in  Ewald's 


THE   FOURTH   COMMANDMENT.  125 

words,  of  "  unsurpassable  truth,"  that  the  first  morning  that  rose  on  Adam 
and  Eve  was  the  morning  of  the  Sabbath  clay.  And  in  spite  of  the 
fall,  the  Sabbath,  has  kept  its  place  among  mankind  as  one  of  the  two  sweet 
relics  of  Eden,  and  is  week  by  week  sent  down  among  us  as  an  earnest  of 
heaven,  a  foretaste  of  the  rest  that  remains  for  the  people  of  God.  The 
second  great  epoch  of  sabbatical  development  and  legislation  was  in  the 
time  of  Moses.  Standing  at  the  head  of  human  history  and  looking  down 
the  long  vista,  we  hardly  ever,  even  among  the  most  darkened  nations,  lose 
sight  of  a  Sabbath  day.  But  it  is  only  at  the  time  of  the  exodus  that 
the  Sabbath  becomes  a  permanent  national  and  ecclesiastical  ordinance,  a 
political  and  religious  institution  of  first-rate  importance. 

Sinai  was  not  the  birth-place  of  the  Sabbath  day.  The  law  of  the  Sabbath 
as  it  was  published  in  the  fourth  commandment  was  not  a  new  thing  on  the 
earth,  any  more  than  the  law  of  reverence  for  the  name  of  God,  or  the 
law  commanding  honour  to  parents.  The  law  of  the  Sabbath,  like  the  laws 
of  worship  and  parental  honour,  was  rather  a  reinforcement  and  republication 
of  a  law  that  had  been  written  on  the  human  heart  from  the  beginning. 
The  Sabbath  was  first  appointed  by  the  Creator  of  mankind,  and  it  was 
issued  anew  by  Him  when  He  became  the  Redeemer  and  Lawgiver  of  Israel. 
And  within  this  holy  field  of  time,  within  and  around  this  hallowed  day,  all 
the  holiest  practices  of  religion,  and  all  the  best  blessings  of  national, 
domestic,  and  individual  life  gathered  in  Israel.  By  this  commandment  a 
space  was  cleared  in  the  daily  life  of  that  ancient  people  for  the  study  and 
pursuit  of  divine  things,  and  among  all  the  debts  that  modern  Christendom 
owes  to  ancient  Israel,  and  they  are  many  and  irrequiteable,  after  Christ 
Himself  and  the  Holy  Scriptures,  the  Sabbath  day  is  the  greatest. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  Hebrew  Sabbath  began  at  sunset  on  Friday, 
and  ended  at  sunset  on  Saturday.  And  from  the  Holy  Scriptures  them 
selves,  as  well  as  from  the  expository  and  ecclesiastical  writings  of  the 
Jews,  we  gather  a  pretty  full  acquaintance  with  the  habits  of  Sabbath 
observance  that  obtained  among  that  people.  Perfect  rest  from  all  manual 
and  mental  toil  was  the  original  and  fundamental  idea  of  the  institution. 
The  Sabbath  was  literally  and  universally  the  day  of  quiet  and  repose.  And 
to  signalize  and  fix  that  idea  in  every  mind,  the  commandment  became 
unusually  explicit  and  minute.  "  The  seventh  clay  is  the  rest  of  the  Lord 
thy  God.  In  it  thou  shall  not  do  any  work  :  thou,  nor  thy  son,  nor  thy 
daughter :  thy  man-servant,  nor  thy  maid-servant,  nor  thy  cattle,  nor  thy  stranger 
that  is  within  thy  gates."  And  though  troublesome  and  vexatious  rules  about 
this  and  that  personal  and  domestic  habit  rose  up  among  the  later  Jews,  still 
this  matter  of  rest  was  and  is  to  them  and  to  us  the  fundamental  law  of  the 
Sabbath  day.  But  it  did  not  follow  that  this  weekly  vacation  from  ordinary 
labour  was  to  be  left  void  of  all  occupation.  The  law  of  holy  rest  did  not 
leave  the  day  open  to  be  wasted  in  sloth  and  idleness.  Indolence  of  body 
and  vacancy  of  mind  are  not  the  divine  rest  designed  for  the  physical, 
intellectual,  and  spiritual  natures  of  man.  And  hence  it  was  that  in  Israel, 
the  Sabbath,  without  ceasing  to  be  a  day  of  real  repose,  became  at  the  same 
time  a  day  of  special  occupation  with  divine  things.  On  the  Sabbath  the 
daily  sacrifices  were  doubled  in  the  tabernacle  and  temple.  On  the  Sabbath 
the  priests  made  ready  the  new  display  of  shewbread,  changing  last  week's 
preparation,  and  setting  forth  the  new  service  upon  the  sacred  table.  On 
that  day  also  the  new  relays  of  priests  relieved  the  exhausted  occupants  of 
the  holy  office  :  the  refreshed  and  recruited  functionaries  commenced  their 


126         THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A  COMMENTARY. 

weekly  terms  on  the  seventh  day.  And  throughout  the  whole  nation  the 
same  special  religious  aspect  was  given  to  the  Sabbath  day.  The  seventh 
day  was  the  day  of  holy  convocation.  On  that  day  the  pious  people  resorted 
to  their  prophets  to  hear  their  new  revelations,  and  their  expositions  and 
applications  of  the  divine  law.  In  later  times,  when  the  prophetical  office 
had  come  to  a  standstill,  the  people  gathered  into  the  synagogues  on  the 
Sabbath  day  for  reading  the  Scriptures,  and  for  mutual  exhortation  and 
prayer.  At  home  also,  in  the  more  devout  households,  all  light  and  foolish 
as  well  as  all  anxious  and  worldly  thoughts  were  banished  from  the  mind, 
and  quiet  meditation  and  communion  with  the  highest  subjects  was  devoutly 
cultivated.  "And,"  as  one  of  their  own  writers  has  said,  "it  is  to  this 
intellectual  and  religious  observance  of  the  Sabbath  day  that  the  Jewish 
nation  owes  the  gratifying  and  auspicious  fact  that  ignorance  never  spread 
among  them  as  among  many  other  nations  and  sects,  and  that  every  Israelite 
was,  in  consequence  of  the  instruction  given  to  him  on  the  Sabbath  day, 
enlightened  in  the  principles  of  his  faith,  so  that,  even  in  the  Middle  Ages, 
when  everywhere  the  deepest  darkness  of  ignorance  and  superstition  pre 
vailed  in  Christendom,  immortal  philosophers  and  poets  flourished  in  Israel." 

Eemember— "This  unique  verbal  form  suggests  that  our  liability  to 
transgress  the  command  is  increased  by  a  danger  of  its  slipping  our  memory. 
Not  that  the  day  itself  is  likely  to  elude  observation  :  on  the  contrary, 
temporal  affairs  are  in  Christian  lands  regulated  and  modified  in  reference  to 
its  occurrence.  But  we  must  not  merely  start  in  the  morning  under  a 
conviction  that  Sunday  is  Sunday  :  we  must  bear  the  circumstance  in  mind 
all  day  long,  doing  or  not  doing  in  intentional  subordination  to  that  dominant 
circumstance,  or  else  we  shall  not  hallow  the  hallowed  day.  Wandering 
thoughts  and  a  wandering  heart  desecrate  it "  (Christina  Rossetti's  Letter  anal 
Spirit}. 

thou  shalt  not  do  any  work,  thou,  nor  thy  son,  nor  thy  daughter,  thy 
man-servant,  nor  thy  maid-servant,  nor  thy  cattle,  nor  thy  stranger  that 
is  within  thy  gates — "  In  this  I  go  so  far  that  I  would  not  have  the  rest  of 
the  Sabbath  day  broken  up  even  by  too  large  demand  for  public  worship. 
We  should  have  time  for  both  body  and  mind  to  come  into  a  state  of  repose. 
...  All  letters  of  business,  all  messengers  of  business,  and  all  conversation 
of  business,  and  all  books  which  treat  of  business  we  should  exclude.  .  .  . 
And  as  the  commandment  is  upon  our  servants  and  the  stranger  within  our 
gates,  so  we  should  hinder  our  workmen  from  doing  anything  on  our  account, 
and  we  should  require  nothing  of  them  save  what  is  necessary  for  our  own 
health  and  the  health  of  the  cattle.  We  should  not  encourage  any  traffic, 
nor  employ  any  Sabbath  vehicles.  Our  Sabbath  journeys  should  be  indeed 
Sabbath-day  journeys ;  and  if  we  employ  the  services  of  our  servants  and 
cattle,  it  should  be  to  them  after  Sabbath-day  measure,  for  health  or  refresh 
ment  sake,  by  no  means  for  labour  or  for  profit.  ...  I  have  no  ascetic 
views  of  the  Sabbath,  and  grudge  not  to  myself  or  the  people  whatever  may 
comfort  and  refresh  their  minds.  And  if  they  find  that  end  to  be  served  by 
walking  abroad  to  meditate  and  muse  upon  the  handiworks  of  God,  to  escape 
from  the  noisy  city,  and  rest  in  some  retired  rural  plain,  I  commend  them  to 
that  or  any  other  method  which  they  find  best  for  fulfilling  the  purposes  of 
God.  But  sure  I  am,  a  crowded  vehicle,  whether  by  land  or  water,  or  a 
public  inn,  or  a  crowded  garden,  or  a  bustling  highway,  or  a  park  parade, 
are  not  the  places  most  fitting  for  repose  and  retirement :  and  they  who  so 


THE   FOURTH   COMMANDMENT.  127 

spend  the  Sabbath,  and  call  it  keeping  the  commandment,  do  but  lie  unto  the 
Lord  and  their  own  soul "  (Edward  Irving). 

' '  The  Being  unblest,  alien  from  good, 
Sabbathless  Satan."— LAMB. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Deriue  Sabbath,  Lord's  day,  Sunday.      Which  is   the  most  fitting   and  proper 
designation  for  us  to  use  ?  and  which  is  the  least  so  ?    State  your  reasons. 

2.  Study  the  analysis  of  Remember  in  Larger  Catechism,  121. 

3.  Perversion  of  the  spirit  while  retaining  the  letter  of  the  precept  is  an  old  art. 
Show  the  application  of  this  aphorism  to  the  matter  in  hand. 

4.  Commit  to  memory  Watt's  hymn : 

Blest  morning!  whose  first  dawning  rays. 
6.  Explain  Pope's  line: 

Ev'n  Sunday  shines  no  Sabbath  day  to  me. 


Q.  59.  Which  day  of  the  seven  hath  God  appointed  to  be  the. 
weekly  sabbath  ? 

A.  From  the  beginning  of  the  world  to  the  resurrection  of 
Christ,  God  appointed  the  seventh  day  of  the  week  to  be  the 
weekly  sabbath;  and  the  first  day  of  the  week  ever  since,  to 
continue  to  the  end  of  the  world,  which  is  the  Christian  sabbath.? 

y  Geh.  ii.  2  :  And  on  the  seventh  day  God  ended  his  work  which  he  had  made  ; 
and  he  rested  on  the  seventh  day  from  all  his  work  which  he  had  made.  Ver.  3  : 
And  God  blessed  the  seventh  day,  and  sanctified  it.  i  Cor.  xvi.  2  :  Upon  the 
first  day  of  the  week  let  every  one  of  you  lay  by  him  in  store,  as  God  hath 
prospered  him,  that  there  be  no  gatherings  when  I  come.  Acts  xx.  7  :  And  upon 
the  first  day  of  the  week,  when  the  disciples  came  together  to  break  bread,  Paul 
preached  unto  them. 

From  the  beginning  of  the  world — The  opening  of  the  book  of  Genesis 
contains  the  account  of  the  appointment  of  the  seventh  day  of  the  week  to  be 
the  weekly  Sabbath,  and  though  there  is  no  direct  reference  to  the  keeping 
of  a  Sabbath  in  Patriarchal  times,  yet  the  repeated  reference  to  a  septenary 
division  of  time  not  only  among  the  Hebrews,  but  also  among  the  Assyrians, 
Egyptians,  Arabians,  and  Persians,  is  a  remarkable,  and  on  any  other  theory 
than  that  of  Scripture,  an  inexplicable  one.  In  his  Antiquities  of  Israel 
Ewald  says  :  "  Many  ancient  nations  were  acquainted  with  a  weekly  circle  of 
seven  days,  which  is  quite  in  accord  with  the  fact  that  such  a  week  is  spoken 
of  in  the  primitive  history  of  Jacob.  These  traces  leave  no  doubt  that  the 
division  into  weeks  of  seven  days,  and  all  consequent  distributions  of  time, 
were  widely  extended  over  the  earth  long  before  the  time  of  Moses." 

The  first  cay  of  the  week  ever  since  the  resurrection  of  Christ— The 


128          THE    SHORTER    CATECHISM   WITH    A   COMMENTARY. 

notorious  deterioration  and  scandalous  abuses  of  the  Mosaic  Sabbath  in  the 
days  of  our  Lord  were  overruled  so  as  to  become  a  kind  of  providential 
preparation  for  the  great  change  that  shortly  after  took  place  as  to  the  time 
and  manner  of  observing  the  fourth  commandment.  The  Sabbath  of  Moses 
was  utterly  and  irrecoverably  demoralized.  A  dense  web  of  foolish,  fantastic, 
and  immoral  tradition?  had  been  spread  over  it,  and  had  become  grave- 
clothes  to  the  mind  and  a  snare  to  the  conscience.  Though  our  Lord  was 
made  under  the  law,  and  fulfilled  all  its  righteousness,  yet  He  took  pains 
again  and  again  to  break  through  the  puerile,  harassing,  and  demoralizing 
teaching  of  the  scribes  and  doctors  concerning  the  Sabbath  day.  And  He 
who  was  the  Lord  of  life  and  the  Lord  of  the  Sabbath  lay  in  the  grave  all 
that  fatal  seventh  day,  and  we  may  say  that  the  dead  Sabbath  of  Judaism 
was  buried  beside  Him,  and,  unlike  Him,  never  saw  a  resurrection.  But 
when  He  rose  from  the  dead,  a  new  Sabbath,  a  better  rest,  a  true  Lord's  day 
rose  with  Him.  Our  Lord  rose  from  the  dead  on  the  first  day  of  the  week. 
For  the  whole  of  that  week  He  was  again  lost  to  His  disciples,  but  appeared 
to  them  again  on  the  first  day  of  the  second  week,  as  if  to  signalize  that  day 
and  make  it  memorable.  Again,  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  which  that  year  fell 
on  the  first  day  of  the  week,  when  the  followers  of  Christ  were  all  met 
together  in  one  place,  as  if  it  were  their  peculiar  Sabbath,  the  Holy  Ghost 
fell  on  them  as  never  before.  Our  blessed  Lord  had  finished  His  work,  He 
had  entered  into  His  rest  from  the  labours  of  our  redemption  ;  and  as  the 
first  man  began  life  on  the  Sabbath  day,  so  the  new  man  in  Christ  Jesus 
counted  His  Sabbath  days,  calling  them  by  a  new  name,  counted  them  from 
the  resurrection  of  Christ,  and  called  them  the  Lord's  day,  the  Chiistiaa 
Sabbath. 

Never,  perhaps,  in  the  history  of  any  sacred  institution  did  Divine  Revela 
tion  so  clearly  devolve  her  functions  on  her  sister  Providence  as  in  the  origin 
and  establishment  of  the  Christian  Sabbath.  There  is  nothing  in  this  depart 
ment  of  sacred  studies  more  striking  and  suggestive  than  the  kindred  and 
parallel  histories  of  the  obsolescent  Jewish  Sabbath  and  the  new  Christian 
Sabbath  during  the  generations  immediately  succeeding  the  resurrection  of 
Christ.  The  quietness  with  which  that  great  innovation  of  the  Lord's  day 
was  brought  into  the  Church  ;  the  gradual  decay  of  the  sacredness  that  had 
been  divinely  and  from  such  an  antiquity  attached  to  the  Jewish  Sabbath  ; 
the  slow,  but  at  last  the  complete  assimilation  by  the  first  day  of  the  week  of 
all  that  had  for  so  long  been  gracious,  beneficent,  and  sacred  in  the  seventh  ; 
and  the  consequent  bequest  to  all  succeeding  times  of  the  Christian  Sabbath, 
— all  this  is  a  triumph  of  providential  patience,  watchfulness,  and  wisdom 
that  has  never  been  sufficiently  studied  or  extolled  in  the  Church  of  Christ. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  The  Confession   calls  the  fourth  a  positive,  moral,  ard  perpetual  command 
ment.    Explain  these  epithets. 

2.  Criticise  this  sapient  utterance:  The  Sabbath,  as  the  Scotch  persist  in  calling 
Sunday 


THE   FOURTH   COMMANDMENT.  1 29 

Q.  60.  How  is  the  sabbath  to  be  sanctified? 

A.  The  sabbath  is  to  be  sanctified  by  a  holy  resting  all  that 
day,2  even  from  such  worldly  employments  and  recreations  as 
are  lawful  on  other  days ; a  and  spending  the  whole  time  in  the 
publick  and  private  exercises  of  God's  worship,b  except  so  much 
as  is  to  be  taken  up  in  the  works  of  necessity  and  mercy.c 

z  Ex.  xx.  8  :  Remember  the  sabbath  day  to  keep  it  holy.  Ver.  10 :  But  the 
seventh  day  is  the  sabbath  of  the  Lord  thy  God  :  in  it  thou  shalt  not  do  any  work, 
thou,  nor  thy  son,  etc.  Ex.  xvi.  25  :  And  Moses  said,  Eat  that  to-day ;  for  to-day 
is  a  sabbath  unto  the  Lord  :  to-day  ye  shall  not  find  it  in  the  field.  Ver.  26  :  Six 
days  ye  shall  gather  it ;  but  on  the  seventh  day,  which  is  the  sabbath,  in  it  there 
shall  be  none.  Ver.  27 :  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  there  went  out  some  of  the 
people  on  the  seventh  day  for  to  gather,  and  they  found  none.  Ver.  28  :  And  the 
Lord  said  unto  Moses,  How  long  refuse  ye  to  keep  my  commandments  and  my 
laws? 

a  Neh.  xiii.  15-22. 

b  Luke  iv.  16  :  As  his  custom  was,  he  went  into  the  synagogue  on  the  sabbath 
day,  and  stood  up  for  to  read.  Acts  xx.  7 :  And  upon  the  first  day  of  the  week, 
etc.  [See  letter  y.]  Ps.  xcii.  [title,  A  psalm  or  song  for  the  sabbath  day.]  Isa. 
Ixvi.  23  :  From  one  sabbath  to  another,  shall  all  flesh  come  to  worship  before  me, 
saith  the  Lord. 

c  Matt.  xii.  from  verse  r  to  31.  Ver.  12 :  It  is  lawful  to  do  well  on  the  sabbath 
days. 

The  sabbath  is  to  be  sanctified  by  a  holy  resting — The  question  ol 
what  constituted  and  what  invaded  and  broke  up  this  holy  rest  was  a 
frequent  cause  of  dispute  between  our  Lord  and  the  scribes  and  doctors 
of  His  day.  The  unlearned  reader  of  the  New  Testament  would  easily 
see  that  there  was  something  very  far  wrong  in  the  habits  and  practices 
as  well  as  the  teaching  about  the  Sabbath  in  the  time  of  our  Lord,  but 
without  some  historical  reading  he  could  form  no  conception  of  the  mass  of 
arbitrary  regulations,  and  fantastic  and  impossible  prohibitions  that  were 
withering  the  hearts  and  exasperating  the  consciences  of  men  when  our  Lord 
began  to  teach.  And  it  made  matters  worse  and  more  irreconcilable 
between  Him  and  the  leaders  in  Israel,  that  He  did  not  aim  merely  to  restore 
the  Mosaic  law  to  its  primitive  purity.  He  had  come,  among  other  things, 
to  make  Moses'  law  not  less  a  law,  but  more  a  life.  He  had  come  to 
exhibit  in  His  own  walk  and  conversation  the  original  and  essential  freshness 
and  spirituality,  the  perennial  richness  and  flexibility  of  the  law  of  God.  It 
was  an  advance  on  Moses  rather  than  a  return  to  him  that  our  Lord  was 
carrying  on  by  word  and  example.  And  hence  we  possess  not  only  the  record 
of  His  example,  but  also  such  penetrating  and  fruitful  utterances  as  these  : 
"  The  Sabbath  was  made  for  man,  and  not  man  for  the  Sabbath,"  and,  "The 
Son  of  man  is  Lord  of  the  Sabbath," — utterances  fitted  and  intended  to  teach 
His  hearers  and  all  men  that  the  Sabbath  law  is  not  the  heavy  and  galling 
yoke  they  were  making  it,  but  is  rather  an  ancient  and  divine  badge  and 
seal  of  liberty,  an  inalienable  franchise  and  a  permanent  privilege  granted 
to  man  by  his  Maker  and  Redeemer. 

"Therefore  I  go  not  to  assign  to  you  any  course  of  employment  for  the 
Sabbath ;  I  plead  simply  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  ordinances,  that  you  work 
not  and  think  not  of  your  vocations,  and  allow  your  minds  to  come  into 

I 


130         THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

repose  from  this  world's  agitations.  Then  nature  and  the  Spirit  of  God  will 
direct  you  to  proper  occupations.  You  will  go  to  the  house  of  prayer  out  of 
choice  ;  you  will  go  to  your  closet  out  of  choice  ;  you  will  read  the  holy  page 
out  of  choice ;  you  will  shun  intrusive  company  out  of  choice ;  and  out  of 
choice  you  will  turn  your  thoughts  to  holy  and  spiritual  subjects.  All  I  ask 
is,  keep  the  intrusion  of  the  world  out,  shut  your  door  upon  worldly  men, 
shut  your  ear  upon  worldly  talk,  shut  your  eye  upon  all  ephemeral  and 
worldly  reading.  Fulfil  the  statute,  and  see  that  those  in  your  household  do, 
and  it  will  come  to  pass  that  ere  long  you  will  derive  the  benefit  of  the 
statute,  both  as  to  bodily  and  spiritual  refreshment.  Your  soul  will  make 
progress  toward  heaven  j  you  will  learn  to  live  above  the  world ;  and  from 
all  the  weariness  of  the  week  you  will  run  like  a  tossed  and  tempest-driven 
vessel  to  the  haven  of  your  Sabbath  rest "  (Edwru-d  Irving). 

the  whole  time — "  Q.  Is  it  the  whole  day,  or  only  some  hours  of  the  day 
that  are  set  apart  for  God  ? — A.  Not  a  part,  but  the  whole  day  is  the  Lord's, 
and  it  is  as  dangerous  to  halve  it  with  God  in  point  of  time,  as  it  was  for 
Ananias  and  Sapphira  to  halve  their  dedicated  goods  and  bring  in  but  a 
part.  Remember  that  thou  keep  holy  the  Sabbath  day  is  the  command" 
(Flavel).  "He  who  keeps  the  day  most  strictly,  most  religiously,  he  keeps 
it  best,  and  most  consonant  to  the  designs  of  the  Church,  and  the  ends  of 
religion,  and  the  opportunity  of  the  present  leisure,  and  the  interests  of  his 
own  soul"  (Jeremy  Taylor). 

in  the  public  and  private  exercises  of  God's  worship— The  student  will 
observe  that  the  Confession  embraces  "Religious  worship  and  the  Sabbath 
day  "  in  one  chapter,  the  twenty-first. 

"Attendance  on  a  Sunday  may,  through  God's  mercy,  avail  even  in  the 
case  of  those  who  have  not  given  themselves  up  to  Him — not  to  their  salva 
tion  (for  no  one  can  be  saved  by  one  or  two  observances  merely,  or  without  a 
life  of  faith),  but  so  far  as  to  break  in  upon  their  life  of  sin,  and  give  them 
thoughts  and  notions  that  may  be  the  germs  of  future  good.  Even  to  those, 
I  say,  who  live  to  the  world,  the  mere  Sunday  attendance  at  church  is  a  con 
tinual  memento  on  their  conscience,  giving  them  a  glimpse  of  things  unseen, 
and  rescuing  them  in  a  measure  from  the  servitude  of  mammon  or  of  Belial. 
And  therefore  it  is  that  Satan's  first  attempt,  when  he  would  ruin  a  soul,  is 
to  prevail  on  him  to  desecrate  the  Lord's  day  "  (Newman). 

"  What  a  man  is  in  his  private  duties,  that  he  is  in  the  sight  of  God,  that 
and  no  more  "  (Owen). 

"  Non  est  religio,  ubi  omnia  patent.  Religion  doth  not  lie  open  to  the 
eyes  of  all  men.  Observed  duties  maintain  our  credit,  but  secret  duties 
maintain  our  life  "  (Flavel). 

except  so  much  as  is  to  be  taken  up  in  the  works  of  necessity  and 
mercy.  The  Confession  does  not  make  works  of  necessity  and  mercy  an 
exception  to,  or  an  intrusion  on  the  exercises  of  God's  worship ;  it  rather 
co-ordinates  them,  and  ranks  them  together: — "The  whole  time  in  the 
public  and  private  exercises  of  His  worship,  and  in  the  duties  of  necessity 
and  mercy."  And  the  Directory  specifies  as  Sabbath-day  duties  "visiting 
the  sick,  relieving  the  poor,  and  such-like  duties  of  piety,  charity,  and 
mercy,  accounting  the  Sabbath  a  delight."  Even  the  Talmud  taught  that 
danger  to  life  always  supersedes  the  Sabbath  law.  Even  for  the  sake  of  the 
tiniest  babe  it  may  be  broken,  "for  the  babe  will  keep  many  a  Sabbath  yet 
for  that  one  that  was  broken  for  it." 


THE   FOURTH    COMMANDMENT.  131 

USES. — i.  "  Every  rightly  constituted  man  has  his  time  of  retreat,  so  that 
in  the  face  of  the  onset  of  tasks  and  impressions  brought  on  him  by  the 
outer  world,  he  may  be,  and  may  continue  to  be,  himself;  and  may 
maintain  by  dint  of  rest  and  recollection  his  proper  personality  as  the 
fixed  point  round  which  his  world  must  range  itself"  (Keim).  This  was 
not  written  to  enforce  the  keeping  of  the  Lord's  day,  but  the  student 
will  at  once  see  its  excellent  application  to  that  duty  and  privilege. 

2.  "Besides  his  particular  calling  for  the  support  of  this  life,  every  one 
has  a  concern  in  a  future  life,  which  he  is  bound  to  look  after.     This 
engages  his  thoughts  in  religion  ;  and  here  it  mightily  lies  upon  him  to 
understand  and  reason  right.     Men  therefore  cannot  be  excused   from 
understanding  the  words,  and  framing  the  general  notions  relating  to 
religion  aright.    This  one  day  of  seven,  besides  other  days  of  rest,  allows 
in  the  Christian  world  time  enough  for  this,  if  they  would  but  make  use 
of  these  vacancies  from  their  daily  labour,   and   apply  themselves   to 
improvement  of  knowledge.   .  .  .  There   are   instances   of  very  mean 
people  who  have  thus  raised  their  minds  to  a  great  sense  and  under 
standing  of  religion  "  (John  Locke). 

3.  "  I  am  always  well  pleased  with  a  country  Sunday  ;  and  think,  if  keeping 
holy  the  seventh  day  were  only  a  human  institution,  it  would  be  the 
best  method  that  could  be  thought  of  for  the  polishing  and  civilizing  of 
mankind  "  (Addison's  Sir  Roger  at  Church}. 

4.  "We  are  on  this  day  specially  to  meditate  upon  and  celebrate  the  work 
of  redemption.     We  are  with  special  joy  to  remember  the  resurrection  of 
Christ,  because  that  was  the  finishing  of  that  work.     This  was  the  day 
of  gladness  of  Christ's  heart ;  it  was  the  day  of  His  deliverance  from  the 
chains  of  death,  and  also  of  our  deliverance  ;  for  we  are  delivered  in  Him 
who  is  our  head." 

5.  "Works  of  mercy  and  charity  are  very  proper  and  acceptable  to  Christ 
on  this  day.     They  especially  become  the  Christian  Sabbath,  because  it 
is  a  day  kept  in  commemoration  of  the  greatest  work  of  mercy  and  love 
towards  us  that  ever  was  wrought "  (Jonathan  Edwards). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  According  to   Luke   vl.  5,  as   it   stands   in   a   manuscript   of  the   sixth   century, 
Jesus  once  met  a  man   who   was  working  on   the  Sabbath,  and  said  to  him :  Man,  if 
thou  knowest  what  thou  art  doing,  thou  art  blessed;  but  if  thou  knowest  not, 
thou  art  cursed,  and  a  transgressor  of  the  law.     Suppose  this  saying  authentic, 
what  does  it  mean  and  teach  ? 

2.  Show  the  bearing  of  the  legal  maxim   mons  logis  est  lex  (the  mind  of  the  law 
is  the  law)  on  the  above  case. 

3.  Bengel  calls    attention  to  the   great  part  the  Sabbath  occupies  in  the  Evangelic 
history.    Out  of  thirty-three  miracles  of  which  we  haue  a  detailed  account  in  the  Gccpels, 
seven  were  performed  on  the  Sabbath  day.    Enumerate  those  seven,  and  deduce  such 
lessons  as  you  discover  in  these  facts. 

4.  Commit  the  following  lines  to  memory : — 

Oh  Perfect  Pattern  from  above, 

So  strengthen  us  that  ne'er 
Prayer  keep  us  back  from  works  of  lovo, 

Or  works  of  love  from  prayer. 


132          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

Q.  6 1.    What  is  forbidden  in  the  fourth  commandment1! 

A.  The  fourth  commandment  forbiddeth  the  omission  or 
careless  performance  of  the  duties  required,d  and  the  profaning 
the  day  by  idleness,  or  doing  that  which  is  in  itself  sinful,6  or 
by  unnecessary  thoughts,  words,  or  works,  about  our  worldly 
employments  or  recreations/ 

d  Ezek.  xxii.  26 :  Her  priests  have  violated  my  law,  .  .  .  and  have  hid  their 
eyes  from  my  sabbaths,  and  I  am  profaned  among  them.  Amos  viii.  5  :  Saying, 
When  will  the  sabbath  be  gone,  that  we  may  sell  corn,  and  that  we  may  set  forth 
wheat?  Mai.  i.  13:  Ye  said  also,  Behold,  what  a  weariness  is  it!  and  ye  have 
snuffed  at  it,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts :  and  ye  brought  that  which  was  torn,  and 
the  lame,  and  the  sick  ;  thus  ye  brought  an  offering  :  should  I  accept  this  of  your 
hand  ?  saith  the  Lord. 

e  Ezek.  xxiii.  38  :  Moreover,  this  they  have  done  unto  me :  they  have  denied 
my  sanctuary  in  the  same  day,  and  have  profaned  my  sabbaths. 

f  Jer.  xvii.  24 :  Bring  in  no  burden  through  the  gates  of  this  city  on  the  sabbath 
day,  but  hallow  the  sabbath  day,  to  do  no  work  therein.  Isa.  Iviii.  13 :  If  thou 
turn  away  thy  foot  from  the  sabbath,  from  doing  thy  pleasure  on  my  holy  day, 
and  call  the  sabbath  a  delight,  the  holy  of  the  Lord,  honourable  ;  and  shall 
honour  him,  not  doing  thine  own  ways,  nor  finding  thine  own  pleasure,  nor 
speaking  thine  own  words. 

forbiddeth  .  .  .  profaning  the  day  by  idleness— "  Freedom  from  all 
occupation,  both  physical  and  mental  and  moral,  is  indolence,  and  thought 
lessness,  and  apathy,  which  cannot  possibly  produce  that  sanctification  which 
is  the  ulterior  aim  of  all  human  aspirations.  The  rest  of  God  is  our  prototype  ; 
but  God  watches  and  rules,  and  is  a  perfect  Spirit  at  all  times ;  to  approach 
Him  is  the  end  of  the  Sabbath ;  but  mental  and  moral  indolence  would 
remove  us  from  Him  ;  and  the  Sabbath,  instead  of  being  the  greatest  blessing 
of  mankind,  would  be  its  greatest  curse  "  (Kalisch).  "  To  rest  and  not  to 
sanctify  is  to  keep  the  Sabbath  of  an  ox  or  an  ass"  (Bp.  Nicholson). 
Eoswell  tells  us  that  Dr.  Johnson,  in  his  forty-sixth  year,  wrote  in  his  journal 
the  following  scheme  of  life  for  Sunday:  "Having  lived  not  without  an 
habitual  reverence  for  the  Sabbath,  yet  without  that  attention  to  its  religious 
duties  which  Christianity  requires  :  I  resolve  henceforth — I.  To  rise  early,  and 
in  order  to  it,  to  go  to  sleep  early  on  Saturday.  2.  To  use  some  extra 
ordinary  devotion  in  the  morning.  3.  To  examine  the  tenor  of  my  life,  and 
particularly  the  last  week  ;  and  to  mark  my  advances  in  religion,  or  recessions 
Irom  it.  4.  To  read  the  Scriptures  methodically  with  such  helps  as  are  at  hand. 
5.  To  go  to  church  twice.  6.  To  read  books  of  divinity,  either  speculative 
or  practical.  7.  To  instruct  my  family.  8.  To  wear  off  by  meditation  any 
worldly  soil  contracted  in  the  week." 

"Absence  of  occupation  is  not  rest; 
A  mind  quite  vacant  is  a  mind  distressed." 

— COWI-ER. 

"  To  lie  late,  to  go  holidaying,  to  doze  in  pew  or  arm-chair,  or  smoke,  is 
not  resting.  Such  rest  deserves  not  the  name  of  rest  when  tried  by  the  sacred 
standard  of  God's  fourth  commandment  "  (Christina  Rossetti). 

unnecessary  thoughts,  words,  or  works — "This  day  was  specially  con 
secrated  to  devout  occupation  with  holy  thoughts.  In  earlier  periods  the 


THE   FOURTH    COMMANDMENT.  133 

people  visited  the  prophets  to  listen  to  their  instructions  and  exhortations 
(2  Kings  iv.  23).  It  was  also  a  day  of  holy  assembly  ;  the  religious  service 
was,  especially  in  later  times,  most  solemn,  and  in  the  synagogue  the  law  was 
read  to  the  congregation  (Joseph.  Antiq.  xvi.  2.  4,  Ap.  i.  22  ;  Luke  iv. 
16,  31  ;  Acts  xiii.  42,  44,  xvi.  13).  Even  light,  thoughtless,  everyday  con 
versations  were  avoided  on  Sabbath  (see  Gesenius  on  Isa.  ii.  230).  It  was 
intended  to  induce  the  Israelite  to  reflect  on  the  state  of  his  soul,  and  on  the 
nature  of  his  conduct,  and  thus  to  be  a  day  of  self-examination,  of  true  repent 
ance,  and  internal  reformation  "  (Kalisch). 

•worldly  employments  or  recreations.  Bunyan  tells  us  in  his  "  Life  and 
Death  of  Mr.  Badman,"  that  "  even  as  a  child  that  unhappy  man  could  not 
endure  the  Lord's  day  because  of  the  holiness  that  did  attend  it.  The 
beginning  of  the  day  was  as  if  he  were  going  to  prison,  except  he  could  get 
out  from  his  father  and  mother  and  lurk  in  bye-holes  among  his  companions 
till  holy  duties  were  over."  Compare  with  Wordsworth's  Brothers : — 

"And  once  I  said, 

As  I  remember,  looking  round  upon  these  rocks 
And  hills  on  which  we  all  of  us  were  born, 
That  God  who  made  the  great  book  of  the  world 
Would  bless  such  piety — 

Never  did  worthier  lads  break  English  bread: 
The  finest  Sunday  that  the  autumn  taw, 
With  all  its  mealy  clusters  of  ripe  nuts, 
Could  never  keep  these  boys  away  from  church, 
Or  tempt  them  to  an  hour  of  Sabbath  breach, 
Leonard  and  James  ! " 

USES. — I.  The  prophet  Ezekiel  said  that  the  Sabbath  in  his  day  was  a 
"sign"  between  Jehovah  and  His  people,  a  sign  whereby  they  might 
know  that  He  acknowledged  and  sanctified  them.  And  what  the  Sab 
bath  was  in  his  day,  it  remains  still  in  our  day.  It  is  an  infallible  sign 
of  the  state  of  true  religion  in  a  land,  in  a  church,  in  a  family,  and  in  a 
man's  own  heart  and  life.  It  may  be  said  of  the  Sabbath  among  divine 
institutions  what  Luther  said  of  justification  by  faith  among  divine 
doctrines — it  is  the  sign  of  a  standing  or  falling  church.  There  is 
perhaps  no  surer  sign  of  a  falling  Christian  than  a  growing  neglect  of 
Sabbath-day  ordinances,  and  an  indolent  and  profane  abuse  of  its  sacred 
and  priceless  hours.  There  is  no  bulwark  that  parents  can  build  up 
around  their  children's  religion  and  morality  like  a  well-kept  Sabbath 
day  ;  and  there  is  no  surer  sign  that  a  young  man  is  declining  from  faith 
and  personal  religion  than  when  he  begins  to  find  his  own  pleasure  and 
do  his  own  way  on  the  Lord's  holy  day.  And  conscience  fastens  with 
peculiar  poignancy  on  the  breaking  of  the  Sabbath  day.  It  is  as  if  she 
instinctively  saw  that  that  day  was  the  stronghold  and  the  tower  of  her 
strength.  Many  of  us,  like  young  Bunyan,  have  been  early  awakened  to 
a  sense  of  sin  through  youthful  acts  of  Sabbath-breaking.  (See  Grace 
Abounding,  20.) 

2.  "  See  that  they  have  some  profitable,  moving  book  (beside  the  Bible)  in 
each  family  ;  if  they  have  not,  persuade  them  to  buy  some  of  small  price 
and  great  use.  If  they  be  not  able  to  buy  them,  give  them  some,  if  you 
can  ;  if  you  cannot,  get  some  gentleman,  or  other  rich  persons  that  are 
willing  to  do  good  works,  to  do  it,  and  engage  them  to  read  them  at 
night  when  they  have  leisure,  and  especially  on  the  Lord's  day.  The 


134          THE    SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

life  of  religion  lieth  much  in  this,  because  poor  people  have  no  other  free 
considerable  time  ;'  and  therefore  if  they  lose  this  they  lose  all,  and  will 
remain  brutish  and  ignorant.  So  should  the  master  of  the  famiby  every 
Lord's  day  at  night  cause  all  his  family  to  repeat  the  Catechism  to  him, 
and  give  him  some  account  of  what  they  have  learned  in  public  that 
day  "  (Baxter's  Reformed  Pastor). 


Q.  62.  What  are  the  reasons  annexed  to  the  fourth  command 
ment? 

A.  The  reasons  annexed  to  the  fourth  commandment  are, 
God's  allowing  us  six  days  of  the  week  for  our  own  employ 
ments^  his  challenging  a  special  propriety  in  the  seventh,  his 
own  example,  and  his  blessing  the  sabbath  day.h 

8  Ex.  xx.  9  :  Six  days  shalt  thou  labour,  and  do  all  thy  work. 

h  Ex.  xx.  ii  :  The  Lord  blessed  the  sabbath  day,  and  hallowed  it. 

his  challenging  a  special  propriety  in  it — "And  so  a  sin,  which  for  the 
outward  act  is  small,  may  in  regard  to  the  inward  of  it  be  a  great  one.  As 
that  act  of  the  man  gathering  sticks  on  the  Sabbath  day,  a  small  thing  in 
appearance,  to  get  a  few  sticks  to  make  a  fire ;  but  he  doing  it  in  contempt  of 
Moses,  so  as  to  put  Moses  into  a  strait,  since  if  for  so  small  a  thing  he  executed 
or  inflicted  any  punishment,  he  would  have  been  thought  a  cruel  governor  by 
all  the  people  ;  but  on  the  other  side,  if  he  should  pass  it  by,  he  opened  a  way 
to  have  the  Sabbath  broken  ;  so  as  it  was  done  in  high  contempt  of  both  God 
and  Moses,  and  this  God  took  notice  of  especially  "  (Goodwin). 

"  Let  us  not  grudge  at  this  requisition  of  God,  that  the  seventh  day  be 
unoccupied,  as  if  He  made  an  invasion  of  our  liberty,  and  grudged  us  the 
enjoyment  of  our  time,  or  sought  to  dispossess  us  of  a  seventh  part  of  our 
gains.  The  Sabbath  was  made  for  man,  not  for  God.  We  are  to  benefit 
from  it,  not  He.  And  the  only  part  the  Almighty  hath  in  the  matter  is  to 
interpose  His  authority  against  our  doing  ourselves  any  harm "  (Edward 
Irving). 

And  besides,  the  Sabbath  comes  to  ourselves  clothed  with  the  very  noblest 
and  most  commanding  traditions  and  associations,  both  national  and  domestic, 
that  would  of  themselves  be  a  royal  law  to  us,  though  we  had  had  none  other. 
For  such  is  the  solicitude  and  submissiveness  of  the  Christian  conscience,  and 
such  is  the  congruity,  propriety,  and  blessedness  of  the  Lord's  day,  that  had 
the  law  of  the  day  been  published  in  no  more  ancient  and  authoritative 
document  than  our  own  confessional  and  catechetical  symbols,  these,  with 
the  subsequent  experiences  and  testimonies  of  a  Sabbath-keeping  people  as 
sanctions,  would  have  been  sufficient  to  have  made  the  Sabbath  day  to  us  "  a 
delight,  the  holy  of  the  Lord,  and  honourable." 

his  blessing  the  sabbath  day.  "If  Sunday  had  not  been  observed  as  a 
day  of  rest  during  the  last  three  centuries,  I  have  not  the  smallest  doubt  that 
we  should  at  this  moment  have  been  a  poorer  and  less  civilized  people  than 
we  are"  (Macaulay). 

But  no  historian  could  attempt  to  tell  the  spiritual  and  saving  blessings 


THE    FOURTH    COMMANDMENT.  135 

that  have  for  millenniums  descended  on  the  Church  through  this  venerable 
and  holy  institution.  The  soul  of  every  believing  and  Sabbath-keeping  man 
contains  for  him  the  best  commentary  on  this  clause. 

"  Bright  shadows  of  true  rest ;  some  shoots  of  bliss  ; 

Heaven  once  a  week  ; 
The  next  world's  gladness  prepossessed  in  this  ; 

A  day  to  seek 
Eternity  in  time ;  time's  bower ; 

The  narrow  way  ; 
Transplanted  paradise  ;  God's  walking  hour ; 

The  cool  o'  the  day  ; 
The  creation's  jubilee  ;  God's  parle  with  dust ; 

Heaven  here  ;  man  on  those  hills  of  myrrh,  of  flowers  ; 
Angels  descending  ;  the  returns  of  trust  ; 
A  gleam  of  glory  after  six  days'  showers." 

— VAUGHAN,  1695. 

USES.  — I.  If  the  Sabbath  day  is  all  this,— and  the  half  of  its  authority, 
dignity,  and  blessedness  hath  not  been  told, — we  may  well  say  with  the 
scholarly  and  devout  Bengel :  "  Let  us  weigh  well  the  caution  to  whosoever 
shall  break  the  least  part  of  this  commandment,  or  shall  teach  men  to 
break  it ;  a  caution  which  can  never  be  too  much  recommended  to 
critics,  teachers,  and  sacred  orators." 

2.   Commit  to  memory  Christopher  Wordsworth's  hymn, 

"  O  day  of  rest  and  gladness  ! " 

Note. — There  is  a  matter  of  some  little  literary  interest  connected  with  the 
word  Sabbath,  rest,  and  another  Hebrew  word  not  unlike  it  in  sound  and 
spelling,  Sabaoth,  hosts.  The  word  Sabaoth  is  transliterated  and  used  cor 
rectly  in  Rom.  ix.  29,  and  in  Jas.  v.  4,  but  it  is  used  in  a  mistaken  sense, 
as  if  it  were  a  form  of  Sabbath,  in  Holinshed,  Spencer,  Bacon,  Shakespeare, 
Johnson,  and  Scott.  This  error  has  been  corrected  in  the  later  editions  of 
most  of  these  writers  ;  but  though  Johnson's  dictionary  fell  into  the  common 
mistake  in  its  first  edition,  and  is  put  right  in  subsequent  editions,  yet 
Richardson  fails  to  point  out  the  distinction  in  collecting  his  examples.  Such 
authorities  as  Sir  George  Grove  and  Aldis  Wright  look  on  this  confusion  as 
the  result  of  the  limited  knowledge  of  Hebrew  that  obtained  even  among  our 
classical  writers,  which  led  them  to  mistake  Sabaoth  for  an  archaic  form  of 
Sabbath.  Dean  Plumptre,  on  the  other  hand,  stoutly  defends  Bacon,  and 
Spencer,  and  Scott ;  and  contends  that  in  their  case,  at  any  rate,  the  error 
lay  not  with  the  writer  but  with  the  printer.  Annandale  thinks  that  Scott 
must  have  used  Sabaoth  for  artistic  reasons. 


Q.  63.   Which  is  the  fifth  commandment '? 

A.  The  fifth  commandment  is,  Honour  thy  father  and  thy 
mother ;  that  thy  days  may  be  long  upon  the  land  which  the  Lottf 
thy  God  give  th  thee* 

Q.  64.    What  is  required  in  the  fifth  commandment? 

A.  The   fifth  commandment   requireth    the    preserving    the 

*  Ex.  xx.  12. 


136          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

honour,  and  performing  the  duties,  belonging  to  every  one  in 
their  several  places  and  relations,  as  superiors^  inferiors,11  or 
equals.1 

Q.  65.    What  is  forbidden  in  the  fifth  commandment? 

A.  The  fifth  commandment  forbiddeth  the  neglecting  of,  or 
doing  any  thing  against,  the  honour  and  duty  which  belongeth  to 
every  one  in  their  several  places  and  relations.111 

Q.  66.    What  is  the  reason  annexed  to  the  fifth  commandment1! 

A.  The  reason  annexed  to  the  fifth  commandment,  is  a 
promise  of  long  life  and  prosperity  (as  far  as  it  shall  serve  for 
God's  glory  and  their  own  good)  to  all  such  as  keep  this 
commandment.11 


J  Eph.  v.  21 :  Submitting  yourselves  one  to  another  in  the  fear  of  God. 

k  i  Pet.  ii.  17 :  Honour  all  men.    Love  the  brotherhood.  .  .  .  Honour  the  king. 

1  Rom.  xii.  10 :  Be  kindly  affectioned  one  to  another  with  brotherly  love ;  in 
honour  preferring  one  another. 

m  Matt.  xv.  4 :  For  God  commanded,  saying,  Honour  thy  father  and  mother : 
and,  He  that  curseth  father  or  mother,  let  him  die  the  death.  Ver.  5  :  But  ye 
say,  Whosoever  shall  say  to  his  father  or  his  mother,  It  is  a  gift,  by  whatsoever 
thou  mightest  be  profited  by  me,  Ver.  6:  And  honour  not  his  father  or  his  mother, 
he  shall  be  free.  Thus  have  ye  made  the  commandment  of  God  of  none  effect  by 
your  tradition.  Rom.  xiii.  8  :  Owe  no  man  any  thing,  but  to  love  one  another  : 
for  he  that  loveth  another  hath  fulfilled  the  law. 

n  Deut.  v.  16 :  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother,  as  the  Lord  thy  God  hath 
commanded  thee  ;  that  thy  days  may  be  prolonged,  and  that  it  may  go  well  with 
thee,  in  the  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee.  Eph.  vi.  2  :  Honour  thy 
father  and  mother,  (which  is  the  first  commandment  with  promise,)  Ver.  3  :  That 
it  may  be  well  with  thee,  and  thou  mayest  live  long  on  the  earth. 

Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother — All  revealed  religion  reposes  on 
the  four  first  commandments  of  the  Decalogue,  and  in  like  manner  all  our 
best  domestic,  social,  and  political  life  has  its  earliest,  deepest,  and  most 
fruitful  roots  in  the  fifth  commandment.  Natural  conscience,  indeed,  supplies 
to  all  men  some  knowledge  of  God,  and  sanctions  a  certain  worship  toward 
Him,  and  in  like  manner  nature  herself  teaches  every  child  to  love  and  honour 
his  parents.  But  just  as  the  natural  conscience  requires  to  be  corrected, 
guided,  and  reinforced  by  revelation,  so  the  filial  instinct  must  be  watched 
over,  its  growth  promoted,  and  its  fruits  secured. 

Of  all  the  commandments  in  the  Decalogue,  perhaps  none  was  so  well 
observed  in  the  house  of  Israel  as  the  commandment  to  honour  father  and 
mother.  Of  all  the  beautiful  and  winning  pictures  of  patriarchal  life  that 
have  been  handed  down  to  us,  there  are  none  so  uniformly  sweet  and  beauti 
ful  as  those  of  parental  love  and  solicitude  on  the  one  hand,  and  those  of 
filial  love  and  honour  on  the  other.  The  union  between  parent  and  child 
was  both  by  divine  law  and  universal  custom  much  closer  and  much  more 
lasting  than  in  our  day  would  be  either  desirable  or  possible.  But  apart  from 
the  local,  primitive,  and  temporary  forms  which  this  natural  relation  and 
divine  precept  took  in  the  patriarchal  communities,  the  parental  care  and  love, 


I     ;3; 


THE    FIFTH    COMMANDMENT. 

and  the  corresponding  filial  reverence  and  obedience  in  the  house  of  Israel  are 
set  before  us  as  ensamples  worthy  of  all  admiration  and  fmitation. 

The  honouring  of  our  parents  comes  in  the  order  of  the  commandants 
after  the  honouring  and  worship  of  God  ;  but  in  the  order  of  nature,  and  in 
our  actual  lives,  the  fifth  commandment  is  the  first  fulfilled.  A  child's  father 
is  more  than  a  father  to  him ;  his  father  is  both  his  father  and  his  god.  A 
little  child  cannot  rise  above  his  father.  It  is  impiety  to  him  to  think  that 
there  can  be  anywhere  any  one  greater  or  better  than  his  own  greatest  and 
best  of  fathers.  To  every  child  his  father  is  the  man  of  men.  There  is 
nothing  he  cannot  do.  There  is  no  valour,  no  nobleness,  no  resources,  no 
wisdom  with  which  he  is  not  clothed.  The  pious  heart  that  will  afterwards 
rise  to  everlasting  adoration  and  love  of  its  Father  in  heaven,  for  a  long  time 
knows  Him  not,  and  feels  no  need  of  Him.  What  child  cares  for  more  than 
just  to  have  his  father  ever  near  him  to  love  and  worship?  And  in  all  this, 
"earthly  fathers  learn  their  craft  from  God."  For  God  for  a  time  clothes 
every  father  among  us  with  His  own  attributes,  and  prerogatives,  and  dues. 
The  divine  throne,  the  divine  sceptre,  the  divine  sword,  are  immediately 
made  over  to  the  house  of  every  man  into  whose  keeping  and  care  a  little 
child  is  committed. 

The  honour  due  to  parents,  and  to  all  superiors  set  over  us  in  the  Lord,  is 
thus  expanded  and  explained  in  the  Larger  Catechism,  that  incomparable 
commentary  on  the  Shorter:  "This  honour  consists  in  all  due  reverence  in 
heart,  word,  and  behaviour ;  prayer  and  thanksgiving  for  them ;  imitation  of 
their  virtues  and  graces  :  willing  obedience  to  their  lawful  commands  and 
counsels  ;  due  submission  to  their  corrections  ;  fidelity  to,  defence,  and  main 
tenance  of  their  persons  and  authority  ;  bearing  with  their  infirmities,  and 
covering  them  in  love,"  and  such  like.  Honour,  indeed,  is  a  noble,  rich,  and 
inexhaustible  word.  Honour  is  more  than  love,  and  it  is  more  than  fear  ;  for 
it  is  both  love  and  fear.  There  may  be  a  love  where  there  is  neither  esteem 
nor  reverence,  and  there  may  be  a  fear  where  there  is  no  affection  ;  but  he 
who  has  true  honour  in  his  heart  toward  any  one,  has  toward  him  both  love 
and  fear.  The  highest  and  noblest  love  always  contains  an  element  of  fear. 
No  one  truly  loves  another  who  does  not  feel  reverence  toward  him.  And 
this  is  the  love  that  is  due  from  a  child  to  his  parents  ;  love  with  fear;  honour, 
which  contains  both  love  and  fear.  A  child  without  this  honour  is  worse 
than  no  child  at  all.  Such  a  child,  says  Calvin,  is  a  monster,  and  not  a  man. 

"  Children,  obey  your  parents  in  the  Lord"  adds  Paul ;  that  is  to  say,  obey 
and  honour  your  parents  as  Christian  children  should  ;  as  the  child  Jesus  did, 
and  as  He  commands.  With  all  Old  Testament  commands  and  counsels 
and  examples,  exalted  and  spiritualized  as  the  New  Testament  exalts  and 
spiritualizes  all  Old  Testament  duties  and  commands. 

that  thy  days  may  be  long  upon  the  land— "The  Lord  spoke  to  the 
Israelites  specially  of  the  land  which  He  had  promised  them  for  an  inherit 
ance.  But  as  the  whole  earth  is  blessed  to  believers,  we  justly  class  the  present 
life  among  the  number  of  divine  blessings.  It  is  not  promised  to  us,  nor  was 
it  promised  to  the  Jews,  as  if  in  itself  it  constituted  happiness,  but  because  it 
is  an  ordinary  symbol  of  the  divine  favour  to  the  Jews.  Wherefore,  if  any 
one  who  is  obedient  to  parents  happens  to  be  cut  off  before  mature  age  (a 
thing  which  not  unfrequently  happens),  the  Lord  nevertheless  adheres  to  His 
promise  as  steadily  as  when  He  bestows  a  hundred  acres  of  land  when  He 
had  promised  only  one"  (Calvin). 


138          THE    SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

"In  my  Father's  house  are  many  mansions  ;  ...  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for 
you.  And  if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  will  come  again  and  receive 
you  unto  myself;  that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also." 

"  We  live  in  deeds,  not  years  ;  in  thoughts,  not  breaths ; 
In  feelings,  not  in  figures  on  a  dial. 
We  should  count  time  by  heart-throbs.     He  most  lives 
Who  thinks  most,  feels  the  noblest,  acts  the  best." 

— FESTUS. 

as  far  as  it  shall  serve  for  God's  glory  and  their  own  good— "It  is  a 

received  rule  among  divines,  that  all  temporal  promises  are  to  be  understood 
cum  exceptions  crucis ;  that  is  to  say,  not  absolutely,  but  with  this  reservation, 
unless  the  Lord  in  His  holy  wisdom  shall  see  it  good  for  us  to  have  it 
otherwise  "  (Sanderson). 

USES. — i.  The  graces  with  which  we  are  clothed  in  our  childhood  will 
'remain  with  us  to  be  our  ornament  and  defence  in  manhood,  and  amid"- 
its  manifold  relationships.  To  honour  our  father  and  mother  is  the  first 
step  toward  honouring  all  men  and  adoring  and  serving  God.  Our  Lord 
is  but  recognizing  this  original  law  of  our  nature,  when  He  says  that  we 
must  become  little  children  again  if  we  would  enter  His  Father's  house. 
That  is  to  say,  we  must  become  simple,  reverent,  devout,  obedient,  as 
we  were  long  ago  when  we  were  little  children. 

2.  Every  well-organized,  well-ruled  household  is  a  very  seminary  of  good 
morals  and  good  manners  to  society,  as  well  as  a  pillar  of  stability  to 
the  State.     All  the  virtues  thrive  in  a  family  where  the  children  are 
ruled  by  a  pious,  loving,  conscientious  hand.     Every  son  who  has  been 
brought  up  in  that  nurture  and   admonition  which  produces  honour, 
respect,  and  obedience,  is  a  gift  to  society  and  the  State  of  a  priceless 
kind. 

3.  In  the  Memoirs  of  Jonathan  Edwards  we  read  largely  of  his  wise  and 
saintly  wife,  and  of  her  success  in  the  upbringing  of  her  children.     As 
thus  :  ' '  She  had  need  to  speak  but  once,  and  she  was  cheerfully  obeyed  ; 
murmuring  and  answering  again  were  not  known  among  her  children. 
In  their  manners  they  were  uncommonly  respectful  to  their  parents. 
When  their  parents  came  into  the  room,  they  all  instinctively  rose  from 
their  seats,  and  never  resumed  them  till  their  parents  were  seated  j  and 
when  either  parent  was  speaking,  no  matter  with  whom  they  had  been 
conversing,  they  were  all  immediately  silent  and  attentive."    The  whole 
Memoir  is  too  little  read. 

4.  "A  man  shall  see,  where  there  is  a  house  full  of  children,  one  or  two 
of  the  eldest  respected,  and  the  youngest  made  wantons.     But  in  the 
middest,  some  there  are,  as  it  were  forgotten,  who,  many  times,  never- 
thelesse,  prove  the  best  "  (Bacon,  Of  Parents  and  Children}. 

5.  "The  justice  of  God  falls  more  severely  on  those  who  degenerate  from 
a  holy  parent  than  on  those  who  have  no  incitement  to  good  from  the 
piety  of  their  homes. " 

6.  ' '  Distaste  will  vitiate  our  observance  of  the  fifth  commandment.  .  .  .  Our 
elders  speak  and  we  wish  they  would  be  quiet ;  their  manners  are  old- 
fashioned,  their  taste  is  barbarous.     Their  opinions  are  obsolete,  their 
standard  is  childish,  they  know  nothing  available,  they  do  not  even  aim 
at  knowing  any  person  or  any  thing  worth  knowing.     We  habitually 
stand  in  an  attitude  of  endurance  or  of  self-defence  ;  we  are  censors  and 


THE   FIFTH   COMMANDMENT.  139 

not  children,  at  best  we  tolerate  what  we  cannot  reform.  Bystanders 
may  see  ever  so  clearly  that  our  father's  little  ringer  outweighs  our  whole 
self,  but  we  see  nothing  of  the  sort.  .  .  .  Nor  is  our  own  day  exempt 
from  even  an  exceptional  temptation  to  this  sin  of  distaste ;  for  now  it  is 
common  enough  in  some  ranks  for  children  to  be  better  taught  than  their 
parents,  and  those  who  acquire  that  dangerous  thing,  a  little  learning, 
are  more  likely  to  be  puffed  up  by  the  little  they  know  than  ballasted  by 
the  much  they  know  not ;  conceit  spurns  at  reverence  and  submission, 
and  the  undermining  of  natural  piety  is  too  often  followed  by  the 
repudiation  of  spiritual  loyalty"  (Christina  Rossetti). 

Q  UESTIONS. 

1.  It  is  not  in  the  power  of  parents  to  traduce  holiness   to  their  children; 
it  is  the  blessing  of  God  that  feoffs  them  in  the  virtues   of  their  parents,  as 
they  feoff  themselves  in  their  sins    (Joseph  Hall).      Derive   and   explain   traduce 
and  feoff. 

2.  Read    the  account    Christian    giues  to  Charity  of   his    carriage    as  a  husband 
and  father  before  he  set  out  on  pilgrimage. 

3.  Explain  Pearson's  words:  "Children,  obey  your  parents  in  the  Lord,"  is  an 
evangelical  precept,  but  founded  upon  principles  of  reason  and  justice. 

4.  Who  first  uttered  these  now  familiar  words  :   How  sharper  than  a  serpent's 
tooth  it  is  to  have  a  thankless  child! 

5.  Commit  Dr.   Horatius  Bonar's  lines  on  a  long  life  :— 

He  liveth  long  who  liveth  well ! 

All  other  life  is  short  and  vain; 
He  liveth  longest  who  can  tell 

Of  living  most  for  heavenly  gain. 

He  liveth  long  who  liveth  well! 

All  else  is  being  flung  away; 
He  liveth  longest  who  can  tell 

Of  true  things  truly  done  each  day. 


Q.  67.    Which  is  the  sixth  commandment  ? 
A.  The  sixth  commandment  is,  Thou  shall  not  kill0 
Q.  68.    What  is  required  in  the  sixth  commandment  ? 
A.  The  sixth  commandment  requireth  all  lawful  endeavours 
to  preserve  our  own  life,p  and  the  life  of  others. * 

Q.  69.   What  is  forbidden  in  the  sixth  commandment? 

A.  The   sixth   commandment  forbiddeth  the  taking  away  of 

0  Ex.  xx.  13. 

P  Eph.  v.  28  :  So  ought  men  to  love  their  wives  as  their  own  bodies  :  he  that 
loveth  his  wife  loveth  himself.  Ver.  29  :  For  no  man  ever  yet  hated  his  own 
flesh  ;  but  nourisheth  and  cherisheth  it. 

q  i  Kings  xviii.  4 :  For  it  was  so,  when  Jezebel  cut  off  the  prophets  of  the  Lord, 
that  Obadiah  took  an  hundred  prophets,  and  hid  them  by  fifty  in  a  cave,  and  fed 
them  with  bread  and  water. 


140          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

our  own  life,  or  the  life  of  our  neighbour  unjustly,  or  whatsoever 
tendeth  thereunto/ 

r  Acts  xvi.  28  :  But  Paul  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Do  thyself  no  harm  ; 
for  we  are  all  here.  Gen.  ix.  6 :  Whoso  sheddeth  man's  blood,  by  man  shall  his 
blood  be  shed  :  for  in  the  image  of  God  made  he  man. 

Thou  shalt  not  kill.  Were  this  all  that  the  sixth  commandment  contains, 
it  might  surely  be  passed  by  without  comment.  It  is*not  to  be  thought  that 
any  one  who  reads  this  page  will  ever  imbrue  his  hands  in  his  brother's  blood. 
Were  the  whole  moral  law  concerning  human  life  fully  expressed,  fully  applied, 
and  fully  illustrated  in  the  letter  of  this  commandment,  then  it  need  not 
detain  us  long.  But  when  we  find  a  Psalmist  saying,  "Thy  commandment  is 
exceeding  broad,"  and  when  we  hear  the  apostle  crying  out  because  of  the 
pain  in  his  own  heart,  "We  know  that  the  law  is  spiritual,"  and  especially, 
when  we  read  our  Lord's  gloss  and  comment  on  this  commandment,  we  come 
to  see  that  it  has  more  to  say  to  us  than  at  first  sight  we  had  thought.  No 
expositor  dare  pass  by  the  sixth  commandment  in  silence  after  reading  this 
utterance  of  his  Divine  Master  :  "Ye  have  heard  that  it  was  said  by  them  of 
old  time,  Thou  shalt  not  kill ;  and  whosoever  shall  kill  shall  be  in  danger  of 
the  judgment  :  but  I  say  unto  you,  That  whosoever  is  angry  with  his  brother 
without  a  cause  shall  be  in  danger  of  the  judgment :  and  whosoever  shall  say 
to  his  brother,  Raca  !  shall  be  in  danger  of  the  council :  but  whosoever  shall 
say,  Thou  fool !  shall  be  in  danger  of  hell  fire. "  That  authoritative  interpre 
tation  lifts  the  sixth  commandment  into  a  new  world ;  the  student  sees  now 
something  of  what  the  Psalmist  meant  when  he  said,  "  Thy  commandment 
is  exceeding  broad."  And  if  any  more  were  needed  to  open  up  the  manifold 
fulness  of  this  commandment,  it  would  be  found  in  the  commentary  supplied 
by  the  Catechism  itself,  in  which  we  are  taught  that  this  commandment 
"requireth  all  lawful  endeavours  to  preserve  our  own  life,  and  the  life  of 
others,"  and  "  forbiddeth  the  taking  away  of  our  own  life,  or  the  life  of  our 
neighbour  unjustly,  or  whatsoever  tendeth  thereunto." 

requireth  all  lawful  endeavours  to  preserve  our  own  life — This  implies 
that  there  may  be  such  a  thing  as  an  unlawful  and  impolitic  endeavour  to 
preserve  our  own  life,  according  to  our  Lord's  apposite  saying  :  "  Whosoever 
shall  seek  to  save  his  life  shall  lose  it ;  and  whosoever  shall  lose  his  life  shall 
preserve  it.  He  that  loveth  his  life  shall  lose  it,  and  he  that  hateth  his  life 
in  this  world  shall  keep  it  unto  life  eternal."  The  paradoxical  saying  of  De 
Witt  has  an  important  bearing  on  this  matter  also:  "Be  careful  of  your 
health,  but  be  careless  of  your  life." 

forbiddeth  the  taking  away  of  our  own  life,  or  the  life  of  our  neigh 
bour  unjustly — This  conditioning  word  unjustly,  suggests,  and  indeed 
teaches,  that  there  is  a  taking  away  of  life  that  is  done  justly.  War  and 
capital  punishment  come  under  the  shelter  of  this  limiting  and  constraining 
clause.  They  are  permitted  and  indeed  enjoined  by  this  commandment 
when  it  is  correctly  interpreted.  Judicially  to  take  away  the  life  of  a 
murderer  is  not  only  lawful,  but  obligatory.  This  commandment  does  not 
say  to  the  judge,  "  Thou  shalt  not  kill ; "  it  does  not  bid  him  put  back  the 
sword  of  justice  into  its  sheath,  for  then  he  would  bear  the  sword  in  vain, 
and  would  become  a  protection  to  evil-doers,  and  a  terror  to  fhem  that  do 
well. 


THE   SIXTH   COMMANDMENT.  141 

War  also,  a  just  and  necessary  war,  is  not  only  not  forbidden,  but  is 
rather  sanctioned  and  enjoined  by  this  commandment.  Religion  does  not 
annul  the  right  and  duty  of  self-defence.  Civilized  nations  must  protect'  the 
life  and  property  and  liberty  of  their  citizens.  This  indeed  is  one  main  end 
of  national  life.  At  the  same  time,  all  rulers  and  judges,  all  statesmen  who 
guide  public  and  international  affairs,  and  all  citizens  whose  suffrages  install 
statesmen,  should  remember  the  noble  words  of  Edmund  Burke  :  "The  blood 
of  man  should  never  be  shed,  but  to  redeem  the  blood  of  man.  It  is  well 
shed  for  our  family,  for  our  friends,  for  our  God,  for  our  country ;  the  rest 
is  vanity  ;  the  rest  is  crime." 

USES. — I.  As  interpreted  and  reissued  by  our  Lord,  this  commandment 
is  directed  against  all  causeless,  unjust,  ungoverned,  and  cherished  anger. 
There  is  an  anger  that  is  natural,  proper,  and  even  praiseworthy ;  and 
again  there  is  an  anger  so  different  from  all  that,  that  it  is  in  danger  of 
the  judgment.  Anger  is  an  emotion  of  the  human  heart  that  slumbers 
in  silence  till  it  is  kindled  and  flames  up  in  the  presence  of  any  wrong. 
Anger,  in  this  sense,  is  a  gift  of  God.  It  is  a  quick  instrument  designed 
to  protect  life  and  life's  interests  against  whatever  would  destroy  or 
injure  them.  No  passion  that  God  has  implanted  in  the  human  heart  can 
be  in  itself  evil.  In  excess,  unrestrained,  unchastened,  put  to  evil  ends, 
our  best  affections  and  emotions  are  injurious  and  sinful ;  but  there  is  a 
legitimate  and  divinely  appointed  scope  and  sphere  for  all  the  passions 
that  God  hath  implanted  in  the  heart  of  man.  And  eminently  so  of 
anger.  Sudden  anger  is  simply  a  natural  instinct.  It  springs  up  before 
reflection,  and  is  independent  of  it.  Anger  is  up  in  arms  in  a  moment 
before  a  man  has  time  to  ask  whether  or  no  he  does  well  to  be  angry. 
The  hand  is  instinctively  and  immediately  lifted  to  protect  the  body  from 
a  sudden  blow,  and  anger  is  as  quick  in  its  movements,  and  is  directed 
to  the  same  end.  But  as  we  best  study  the  doctrine  of  anger  in  the 
teaching  of  our  Lord,  so  do  we  find  in  His  conduct  its  safest  and  best 
illustration.  He  was  made  man  ;  that  is  to  say,  He  had  in  His  heart 
all  our  passions  and  affections,  and  again  in  His  words  and  deeds  we  see 
this  passion  of  anger  burning  up  against  wrong,  and  burning  up  for  our 
example.  "  Be  angry,"  says  the  apostle,  "and  sin  not.  Let  not  the 
sun  go  down  upon  your  wrath." 

2.  But  it  is  a  very  different  thing  when  instinctive  anger  and  righteous 
indignation  become  settled  hatred  and  invincible  malice.  Now  that  this 
i'm  is  both  natural  and  universal  among  men,  the  apostle  teaches  us  in 
the  confession  he  makes  about  himself.  "We  ourselves,"  he  says, 
"sometimes  lived  in  malice  and  envy,  hateful,  and  hating  one  another." 
And  this  fearful  indictment  is  not  any  too  dark,  as  every  man  must  confess 
with  shame  and  guilt  who  reads  aright  what  goes  on  in  his  own  heart. 
Hatred  is  an  inveterate  and  bitter  dislike  at  any  one,  a  dislike  that  is 
always  accompanied  with  a  more  or  less  explicit,  a  more  or  less  acknow 
ledged  and  fostered  desire  to  hurt  the  hated  person.  "Hates  any  man," 
cries  Shylock,  "the  thing  he  would  not  kill!"  Murder,  in  the  teach 
ing  of  our  Divine  Master,  and  in  the  teaching  of  the  greatest  master 
of  the  human  heart  that  has  ever  risen  among  the  sons  of  men,  is  not 
alone,  is  not  at  all  in  the  act,  it  is  in  the  wish  and  intention.  And 
when  we  have  the  wish,  though  the  murderous  act  is  securely  hindered, 
yet  in  God's  sight  we  are  red  all  over  with  our  brother's  blood. 


142          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

"  The  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked  :  who 
can  know  it  ?  I  the  Lord  search  the  heart,  I  try  the  reins,  even  to  give 
every  man  according  to  his  ways,  and  according  to  the  fruit  of  his  doings." 

3.  Our  Lord  counts  scorn  also  under  the  same  murderous  category  with 
anger  and  hatred.    But  here  also  a  distinction  must  be  taken.     Scorn,  like 
anger,  may  sometimes  be  most  fitting,  most  just,  and  most  praiseworthy. 
There"  is  in  all  noble  hearts  a  divinely  implanted  and  noble  scorn  where 
with  to  blight  and  burn  up  all  meanness  and  selfishness,  all  despicable 
and  contemptible  persons  with  all  their  mean   and   despicable    deeds. 
The  Scriptures,  and  especially  the  prophetical  scriptures,  abound  in  this 
divine  and  magnanimous  scorn.      But,   on  the  other  hand,  there  is  the 
satanic  scorn  of  a  proud,  hard,  cruel  heart.     A  scorn  very  far  indeed 
from  that  exhibited  by  Isaiah  and  Jesus  Christ.     This  scorn  is  full  of 
contumelious  and  bitter  words.     It  despises  and  humiliates  men  out  of 
sheer  ungodliness  and  pride  of  heart.     And  if  it  is  too  proud  to  show 
itself  scornful,  it  is  not  less,  but  more  hateful  in  the  sight  of  God.     It  is 
far  easier  and  far  more  natural  for  all  of  us  to  look  down,  and  find  fault, 
and  despise,  and  scorn,  than  it  is  to  look  up,  and  find  excellence,  and 
then  to  honour,  and  reverence,  and  praise. 

"No  knight  of  Arthur's  noblest  dealt  in  scorn." 

4.  "  We  ourselves  were  sometimes  living  in  malice  and  envy,  hateful,  and 
hating  one  another "  (Paul).     Homo  homini  lupus  (Old  saying).     "Lady 
Macleod    asked    if  no    man   was    naturally    good?      JOHNSON.    No, 
Madam,  no  more   than  a    wolf.      BOSWELL.    Nor    no    woman,    Sir? 
JOHNSON.  No,  Sir  !  "  (Johnson  at  Dunvegan). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Study  the  Larger  Catechism,  Questions  134-136. 

2.  Read  Butler's  sermons  Upon  Resentment,  and  Upon  Forgiveness  of  Injuries ; 
and  note  his  teaching  on  the  differences  between  malice  and  all  other  passions  of  the 
human  heart. 

3.  Giue  some  examples  of  unlawful  endeavours  to  preserve  our  own  life. 

4.  Show  the  bearing  and  application  of  the  saying :  Be  careful  of  health,  but  be 
careless  of  life. 

5.  Commit  the  lines  : — 

"  To  whom  our  ancestor, 

'Henceforth  I  fly  not  Death,  nor  would  prolong 
Life  much,  bent  rather  how  I  may  be  quit 
Fairest  and  easiest  of  this  cumbrous  charge; 
Which  I  must  keep  till  my  appointed  day 
Of  rend'ring  up,  and  patiently  attend 
My  dissolution.'  Michael  repli'd, 

'Nor  love  thy  life,  nor  hate;  but  what  thou  liv'st 
Live  well;  how  long  or  short  permit  to  Heav'n.'" 


Q.  70.   Which  is  the  seventh  commandment? 
A.  The  seventh  commandment   is,    Thou  shalt  not  commit 
adultery.'8' 

8  Ex.  xx.  14. 


THE   SEVENTH    COMMANDMENT.  143 

Q.  71.    What  is  required  in  the  seventh  commandment? 

A.  The  seventh  commandment  requireth  the  preservation  of 
our  own  and  our  neighbour's  chastity,  in  heart,  speech,  and 
behaviour.* 

Q.  72.    What  is  forbidden  in  the  seventh  commandment  ? 

A.  The  seventh  commandment  forbiddeth  all  unchaste 
thoughts,  words,  and  actions." 

*  i  Cor.  vii.  Col.  iv.  6  :  Let  your  speech  be  alway  with  grace,  seasoned  with 
salt,  that  ye  may  know  how  ye  ought  to  answer  every  man.  i  Pet.  iii.  2  :  While 
they  behold  your  chaste  conversation  coupled  with  fear. 

u  Matt.  xv.  19  :  For  out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts,  adulteries,  fornica 
tions.  Matt.  v.  28  :  But  I  say  unto  you,  That  whosoever  looketh  on  a  woman  to 
lust  after  her,  hath  committed  adultery  with  her  already  in  his  heart.  Eph.  v.  3  : 
But  fornication,  and  all  uncleanness,  or  covetousness,  let  it  not  be  once  named 
among  you,  as  becometh  saints  ;  Ver.  4 :  Neither  filthiness,  nor  foolish  talking, 
nor  jesting,  which  are  not  convenient. 

There  are  two  principal  and  indeed  essential  relationships  in  every  house 
hold  and  home  of  the  human  kind,  in  every  house  that  is  also  a  home.  There 
is  first  the  relationship  of  parent  and  child,  and  there  is  also  the  relation 
ship  of  husband  and  wife.  Other  relationships  may  attach  themselves  to 
these,  such  as  that  of  brother  and  sister,  master  and  servant,  magistrate  and 
citizen,  sovereign  and  subject.  But  the  relationships  that  constitute  and  are 
essential  to  every  complete  human  home  are  the  parental  and  conjugal 
relationships.  The  fifth  commandment  protects  the  integrity  and  sanctity  of 
the  parental  and  filial  relationships,  and  the  seventh,  in  like  manner,  protects 
the  yet  more  sacred  relationship,  the  supreme  and  inviolable  union  between  a 
man  and  a  woman  in  marriage. 

"  The  communion  of  the  sexes  is  the  complete  giving  up  and  appropriating 
of  each  party  as  the  property  of  the  other  ;  hence  where  it  is  not  the  fruit 
of  an  already  accomplished,  morally-personal,  spiritual  unity,  it  is  then  an 
immoral  throwing  away  of  one's  moral  personality,  an  irremediable  ruining  of 
the  moral  personality  of  the  other.  Lost  innocence  is  irrecoverable,  love 
that  is  not  moral  love  is  a  defamation  "  (Wuttke). 

"There  is  no  ancient  religion  which  is  so  sternly  opposed  to  misconduct 
in  these  relations,  and  is  yet  so  free  from  unnatural  limitations  of  their  due 
rights  as  Jahveism,  the  religion  of  Jehovah.  What  importance  it  attached 
to  their  purity,  and  how  it  sought  to  protect  real  marriage  as  the  primary 
basis  of  all  true  life  in  common  among  human  beings,  is  at  once  shown  by 
its  stringent  laws  on  the  subject.  Chastity  is  an  equal  good  with  life  itself. 
.  .  .  The  fair  type  of  true  matrimony  in  Isaac  and  his  Rebecca  does  no  more 
than  represent  with  little  alteration  marriage  as  it  really  existed  in  the  majority 
of  families  during  the  best  days  of  the  nation.  Simple  fidelity,  pious  love 
and  attachment,  and  hence  a  certain  amount  of  foresight  in  the  choice  of  a 
wife  from  a  worthy  race,  were  not  less  in  reality  than  they  are  in  that  type, 
the  foundation  on  which  a  new  family  in  Israel  was  created.  All  else  that 
we  know  from  history  was  in  harmony  with  this  ;  and  here,  too,  we  may 
clearly  recognize  the  mighty  working  of  an  elevated  religion  "  (Ewald). 

USES. — I.   "  There  is  a  perfect  harmony  between  obligation  to  God  and  all 
the  sources  of  pleasure  and  happiness  God  has  provided,  so  that  there  is  no 


144          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM    WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

real  collision  between  the  statutes  over  us  and  the  conditions  within 
us.  It  is  only  false  pleasures  that  are  denied  us,  those  that  would 
brutalize  the  mind,  or  mar  the  health  of  the  body,  or  somehow  violate 
the  happiness  of  fellow-beings  around  us  "  (Bushnell). 

2.  "  Amongst  all  sins,    the  sin  of  uncleanness  lies    heaviest   upon   the 
conscience  ;  for  no  other  sin  is  so  directly  contrary  to  holiness ;  no  sin 
quenches  the  Holy  Ghost  like  this  "  (Burkitt). 

3.  "How  should  our  festered  sores  be  cured,  but  that  God  hath  delivered 
a  law  as  sharp  as  the  two-edged  sword,  piercing  the  very  closest  and 
most  unsearchable  corners  of  the  heart,  which  the  law  of  nature   can 
hardly,  human  laws  by  no  means  possibly,   reach  unto  ?      Hereby  we 
know   even  secret  concupiscence  to   be  sin,   and  are  made  fearful  to 
offend  though  it  be  but  in  a  wandering  cogitation  "  (Hooker). 

4.  In  the  Larger  Catechism,  intemperance  in  eating  and  drinking,  im 
modest  apparel,  idleness,  listening  to  filthy  and  corrupting  conversation, 
lascivious  songs,  books,  pictures,  and  all  other  provocations  to  sin  are 
denounced.     There  is  a  great  lesson  to  all  men  who  -would  keep  them 
selves  pure  in  heart  and  life  in  the  old  classical  story  in  which  Cupid 
complains  to  Jupiter  that  he  could  never  fasten  upon  the  Muses,  because 
he  could  never  find  them  idle.     And  as  regards  our  literature,  pure  as 
on  the  whole  it  is,  still  there  is  room  for  Cowley's  lament,  that 

"  Still  the  old  heathen  gods  in  numbers  dwell, 
The  heavenliest  thing  on  earth  still  keeps  up  hell." 

Concerning  immoral  thoughts  Dr.  Johnson  said  :  "To  attempt  to  think 
them  down  is  madness."  And  again  :  "Be  not  solitary  when  you  are 
idle,  be  not  idle  when  you  are  solitary." 

5.  "  True,  all  our  lives  long  we  shall  be  bound  to  refrain  our  soul,  and 
keep  it  low  :  but  what  then  ?     For  the  books  we  now  forbear  to  read, 
we  shall  one  day  be  endued  with  wisdom  and  knowledge.       For  the 
music  we  will  not  listen  to,  we  shall  join  in  the  song  of  the  redeemed. 
For  the  pictures  from  which  we  turn,  we  shall  gaze  unabashed  on  the 
Beatific  Vision.     For  the  companionship  we  shun,  we  shall  be  welcomed 
into  angelic  society,  and  the  communion  of  triumphant  saints.     For  the 
amusements  we  avoid,  we  shall  keep  the  supreme  jubilee.     For  all  the 
pleasure  we  miss,  we  shall  abide,  and  for  evermore  abide,  in  the  rapture 
of  heaven  "  (Christina  Rossetti). 

6.  "Think,"  says  Cornelius  a  Lapide,   "when  lust  goads   thee,  in  thy 
hand  and  choice  are  heaven  and  hell,  salvation  and  damnation,  bliss  or 
misery  everlasting.       Choose.      Think.      A  moment  which   delighteth, 
eternity  which  tortureth  ;  on  the  other  hand,  a  moment  which  tortureth, 
eternity  which  delighteth." 

7.  Q.   What  is  the  first  inference  hence  ? — A.   What  cause  those  have  to 
bless  God  that  have  been  kept  from  sin :  though  the  best  ought  to  be 
humbled  for  their  heart's  pollutions.     Q.  What  is  the  second  inference 
from  hence? — A.  Let  it  warn  parents  to  do  what  in  them  lies  to  prevent 
the  ruin  of  their  children  by  this  sin.      (i)  By  filling  their   heads  and 
hands  with  lawful  business.     (2)  By  keeping  them  from  vain  and  tempting 
company.     (3)  By  serious   admonition   and   prayers   for   them.     (4)  By 
disposing  them  seasonably  in  suitable  marriage  (Flavel). 


THE   EIGHTH   COMMANDMENT.  145 

Q.  73.   Which  is  the  eighth  commandment? 

A.  The  eighth  commandment  is,  Thou  shalt  not  steal? 

Q.  74.   What  is  required  in  the  eighth  commandment '? 

A.  The  eighth  commandment  requireth  the  lawful  procuring 
and  furthering  the  wealth  and  outward  estate  of  ourselves  and 
others.w 

Q.  75.    What  is  forbidden  in  the  eighth  commandment? 

A.  The  eighth  commandment  forbiddeth  whatsoever  doth  or 
may  unjustly  hinder  our  own  or  our  neighbour's  wealth  or  out 
ward  estate. x 

v  Ex.  xx.  15. 

w  Gen.  xxx.  30 :  For  it  was  little  which  thou  hadst  before  I  came,  and  it  is  now 
increased  unto  a  multitude  ;  and  the  Lord  hath  blessed  thee  since  my  coming : 
and  now,  when  shall  I  provide  for  mine  own  house  also  ?  i  Tim.  v.  8  :  But  if  any 
provide  not  for  his  own,  and  specially  for  those  of  his  own  house,  he  hath  denied 
the  faith,  and  is  worse  than  an  infidel.  Lev.  xxv.  35 :  And  if  thy  brother  be 
waxen  poor,  and  fallen  in  decay  with  thee,  then  thou  shalt  relieve  him  ;  yea, 
though  he  be  a  stranger,  or  a  sojourner:  that  he  may  live  with  thee.  Deut. 
xxii.  1-5.  Ex.  xxiii.  4  :  If  thou  meet  thine  enemy's  ox  or  his  ass  going  astray, 
thou  shalt  surely  bring  it  back  to  Lim  again.  Ver.  5  :  If  thou  see  the  ass  of  him 
that  hateth  thee  lying  under  his  burden,  and  wouldest  forbear  to  help  him  ;  thou 
shalt  surely  help  with  him.  Gen.  xlvii.  14 :  And  Joseph  gathered  up  all  the 
money  that  was  found  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  for  the 
corn  which  they  bought :  and  Joseph  brought  the  money  into  Pharaoh's  house. 
Ver.  20:  And  Joseph  bought  all  the  land  of  Egypt  for  Pharaoh  ;  for  the  Egyptians 
sold  every  man  his  field,  because  the  famine  prevailed  over  them  :  so  the  land 
became  Pharaoh's. 

x  Prov.  xxi.  17  :  He  that  loveth  pleasure  shall  be  a  poor  man  ;  he  that  loveth 
wine  and  oil  shall  not  be  rich.  Prov.  xxiii.  20 :  Be  not  among  wine-bibbers ; 
among  riotous  eaters  of  flesh  :  Ver.  21 :  For  the  drunkard  and  the  glutton  shall 
come  to  poverty  ;  and  drowsiness  shall  clothe  a  man  with  rags.  Prov.  xxviii.  19  : 
He  that  tilleth  his  land  shall  have  plenty  of  bread  :  but  he  that  followeth  after 
vain  persons  shall  have  poverty  enough.  Eph.  iv.  28 :  Let  him  that  stole  steal 
no  more  :  but  rather  let  him  labour,  working  with  his  hands  the  thing  which  is 
good,  that  he  may  have  to  give  to  him  that  needeth. 

All  questions  connected  with  the  sanctity  and  inviolability  of  human  life 
are  covered  by  the  sixth  commandment,  and  all  dangers  and  duties  that  arise 
in  connection  with  the  preservation  of  personal  purity  are  searched  out  by  the 
breadth  and  inwardness  of  the  seventh  :  and  then  in  the  ethical  development 
and  excellent  order  of  the  Decalogue  comes  the  eighth  commandment 
securing  and  consecrating  each  man's  property  and  possessions.  The  divine 
law  here  sets  a  hedge  about  every  man,  and  about  his  house,  and  about  all 
that  he  hath  on  every  side.  Second  only  to  the  commandments  protecting 
life  and  honour  comes  the  commandment  which  covers  all  matters  connected 
•with  the  earning,  saving,  spending,  inheriting  and  bequeathing  of  money  and 
property.  The  eighth  commandment  enters  a  quite  new  field  of  human  life, 
but  this  commandment  is  not  less  broad,  or  less  deep,  or  less  spiritual  than 
those  that  have  gone  before  it,  as  we  shall  soon  see. 

All  a  man's  possessions,  go  back  to  the  beginning  of  them,  go  down 
to  the  bottom  of  them,  will  always  be  found  to  represent  so  much  self- 

K 


146          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

denial,  labour,  industry.  Obscure  as  may  be  the  origin,  history,  and  growth 
of  this  or  that  particular  estate,  yet  it  must  in  its  beginning  have  been  due 
to  some  man's  obedience  to  the  Creator's  law  of  labour  and  reward.  "  Be 
fruitful,  and  multiply,  and  replenish  the  earth,  and  subdue  it."  This  is  the 
original  charter  of  the  right  of  property.  But  the  world  is  old  in  our  day, 
and  the  primitive  conditions  of  personal  labour  and  direct  reward  are  some 
what  overlaid  and  correspondingly  obscured.  And  fundamental  and  rigorous 
as  the  law  of  labour  is,  there  are  nowadays  many  other  ways  in  which  men 
come  into  the  possession  of  property.  If  each  man  among  us  held  only  what 
he  had  himself  earned  and  made,  the  world's  wealth  would  be  incalculably 
less  than  it  is,  and  what  there  would  be  of  it  would  be  very  differently 
distributed.  Even  in  the  house  of  Israel,  much  nearer  as  human  life  then 
was  to  its  original  foundations,  the  ultimate  ground  of  all  personal  property 
and  family  wealth  was  not  so  much  that  it  was  the  fruit  of  personal  exertion 
as  that  it  was  the  direct  donation  of  their  covenant  God.  Jehovah,  who  had 
made  earth  and  sea,  could  enrich  or  impoverish,  could  give  or  withhold  as 
seemed  to  Him  good.  And  this  gracious,  and,  so  to  say,  supernatural  ground 
of  Israel's  possessions  penetrated  all  the  economy  of  domestic,  ecclesiastical, 
and  political  finance.  Still,  there  was  room  left  in  the  theocratic  and  patriar 
chal  system  of  the  Hebrews  for  the  free  and  full  play  of  those  laws  of  labour 
and  reward  on  which  the  Creator  had  constructed  human  society  on  the 
earth  ;  so  much  so,  that  we  find  principles  and  rules  and  illustrations  in  the 
Old  Testament  that  are  wisely  applicable  to  all  varieties  of  human  life  in  all 
its  modern  developments  and  relationships. 

USES. — I.  "These  things  are  linked  and  as  it  were  chained  one  to  another  ; 
we  labour  to  eat,  and  we  eat  to  live,  and  AVC  live  to  do  good,  and  the  good 
which  we  do  is  as  seed  sown  with  reference  unto  a  future  harvest  " 
(Hooker). 

2.  Industry  is   one  of  the  prime  virtues  of  human  life  upon  the  earth  : 
work   is   both  a  necessity   and  a  virtue   in   man.      But   hard   work  is 
seldom  divorced  from  its  due  and  proper  fruits  :  labour  is  lightened  and 
sweetened  by  the  hope  of  its  proper  wages.       And  well-directed  and 
successful  labour  enriches  the  labourer  in  more  and  better  ways  than  in 
the  mere  accumulation  of  his  wages,  or  in  the  collection  and  possession 
of  riches.     For  the  possession  of  this  world's  good  things  enlarges  and 
ennobles  the  possessor's  whole  life.      Human  existence  on  the  earth 
becomes  a  better  and  more  desirable  thing  when  hard  work  has  once  had 
its  proper  reward,  and  a  man  has  been  put  in  possession  of  the  garnered 
fruits  of  his  past  diligence  and  industry.     Enlarging  possessions  expand 
and  enrich  a  man's  earthly  existence  :  according  to  their  amount  they 
increase  his  power  for  good  :  they  multiply  his  opportunities,  and  they 
help  to  make  his  earthly  existence  sheltered,  and  refined,   and  full  of 
manifold  means  of  good-doing  and  delight. 

3.  Akin  to  the  habit  of  industry  is  the  sister  habit  of  frugality  and  fore 
thought.       And  this  virtuous  r  habit  cannot   be   commenced   too   soon. 
Even  children  should  be  exercised  in  little  ways  of  frugality  and  self- 
denial.     They  should  be  taught  to  spare  something  off  playthings  and 
sweetmeats,  which,   when    sufficiently  accumulated,  would  purchase  a 
piece  of  dress  for  themselves,  or  a  birthday  present  for  father  or  mother, 
sister  or  brother.     The  immediate  object  of  such  youthful  frugality  is  of 
less  importance  than  the  formation  of  the  virtuous  and  fruitful  habit. 


THE   EIGHTH   COMMANDMENT.  147 

Then  again,  every  young  man  on  the  expiry  of  his  apprenticeship  should 
open  an  account  with  a  savings  bank.  If  his  wages  are  as  yet  small, 
then  perforce  his  savings  will  be  small  also  :  but  at  their  smallest  they 
will  grow,  and  he  will  grow  alongside  of  them  in  carefulness,  temperance, 
frugality,  and  forethought.  And  then,  when  the  time  comes  that  he 
takes  up  a  house  of  his  own,  he  will  not  need  to  lie  down  on  a  borrowed 
bed,  or  eat  his  meals  out  of  a  dish  he  is  in  debt  for.  All  men  should 
honourably  save  something  against  a  rainy  day.  If  these  and  suchlike 
"  minor  moralities  "  are  despised,  then  the  chances  are  that  other  people 
will  have  to  pay  for  it.  There  are  other  ways  of  robbing  our  neighbours 
besides  garrotting  them  in  the  dark  :  and  the  worst  and  most  barefaced 
thieves  a  man  ever  meets  with  are  usually  those  of  his  own  reckless  and 
improvident  household.  This  commandment  also  is  exceeding  broad. 
4.  "  Of  great  riches,"  says  Lord  Bacon,  "  there  is  no  real  use,  except  it  be 
in  the  distribution.  There  is  a  custody  of  them  ;  or  there  is  a  power  of 
dole  and  donation  of  them ;  or  a  fame  of  them ;  but  beyond  distribu 
tion  there  is  no  solid  use  of  them  to  their  owner.  Seek  not  therefore," 
adds  the  essayist,  "  proud  riches,  but  such  as  thou  mayest  get  justly, 
use  soberly,  distribute  cheerfully,  and  leave  contentedly."  And  accord 
ingly,  in  all  systems  of  morals — Pagan,  Hebrew,  and  Christian — liberality 
is  esteemed  among  the  noblest  of  the  virtues.  "  Property,"  says  Aristotle, 
in  the  fourth  book  of  his  Ethics,  "is  evidently  a  thing  to  be  used. 
The  very  essence  of  property  is  its  use,  and  liberality  is  that  quality 
or  virtue  which  enables  us  to  make  the  best  use  of  property.  .  .  . 
However,  as  all  virtues  have  a  noble  end  in  view,  mere  giving  freely  is 
not  enough  to  constitute  liberality.  Special  regard  must  be  had  to  three 
conditions :  A  noble  motive,  due  consideration  of  the  occasion  and 
amount  of  the  gift,  and  cheerfulness  on  the  part  of  the  giver.  The 
absence  of  any  of  these  conditions  destroys  the  liberality  of  the  gift." 
"Munificence,"  the  same  master  in  morals  tells  us,  "differs  from 
liberality  in  the  largeness  of  the  sums  in  which  it  deals.  Its  general 
character  is  magnitude.  There  is  a  sort  of  scientific  skill  implied  in 
munificence.  The  occasion  must  be  worthy  of  the  expenditure,  and  the 
expenditure  worthy  of  the  occasion.  There  must  also  be  a  desire  after 
what  is  noble.  There  is  a  grandeur  of  manner  which  imparts  a  special 
lustre  to  the  acts  of  a  munificent  man.  We  pass  now,"  he  continues, 
"to  the  occasions  which  are  fitting  for  the  display  of  munificence. 
And  we  notice,  first,  the  service  of  religion,  and  next  the  great 
public  and  patriotic  services.  To  these  cases  we  may  add  great  and 
rare  occasions  in  private  life,  such  as  a  wedding,  works  of  public  and 
general  interest,  entertaining  strangers,  making  and  returning  presents ; 
or,  again,  the  furnishing  and  ornaments  of  one's  house  ;  and,  generally, 
permanent  rather  than  perishable  objects.  There  is  a  greatness  in  any 
work  that  is  perfect  of  its  kind,  even  in  toy  presents  to  children.  Even 
in  the  smallest  matters  the  munificent  man  will  act  munificently."  But 
while  munificence  is  possible  to  only  a  very  few  men,  liberality,  on  the 
other  hand,  is  open  to  all.  For  liberality  is  in  the  mind  and  in  the 
manner  more  than  in  the  amount.  "If  there  be  first  a  willing  mind,  it 
is  accepted  according  to  that  a  man  hath,  and  not  according  to  that  he 
hath  not. 

"  Neither  a  borrower  nor  a  lender  be  ; 

For  loan  oft  loseth  both  itself  and  friend, 

And  borrowing  dulls  the  edge  of  husbandry." 


148          THE    SHORTER    CATECHISM    WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 


QUESTIONS. 

1.  The  real  truth  is,  the  equitable  man  is  superior  to  the  just  man.  .  .  .  The 
just  and  equitable  man  are  each  good,  but  the  equitable  man  is  the  best  (Nic. 
Eth.  v.  10).    Law  enforced  to  strictness  sometimes  becomes  the  severest  injustice 
(Terence).    Cp.  Courts  of  justice  and  Courts  of  equity.    Explain  and  illustrate. 

2.  Study  and  verify  the  following  .-—The  love  of  justice  is  among  the  rarest  of  all 
good  qualities;  the  love  of  it  with  full  and  commanding  strength.    I  would  almost 
dare  to  say  there  are  five  generous  men  for  one  just  man.  .  .  .    The  passions  will 
often  ally  themselves  with  generosity,  but  they  always  tend  to  divert  from  justice 
(Mr.  Gladstone's  Encomium  on  Lord  Aberdeen). 

3.  Study  the  magnificent  passage  in  the  first  book  of  Paradise  Lost,  commencing 
Mammon  led  them  on. 

4.  See  By-Ends'  cases  of  conscience  in  the  Pilgrim's  Progress. 


Q.  76.    Which  is  the  ninth  commandment  1 

A.  The  ninth  commandment  is,  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false 
witness  against  thy  neighbour? 

Q.  77.   What  is  required  in  the  ninth  commandment  1 

A.  The  ninth  commandment  requireth  the  maintaining  and 
promoting  of  truth  between  man  and  man,2  and  of  our  own  and 
our  neighbour's  good  name,a  especially  in  witness-bearing.11 

Q.  78.    What  is  forbidden  in  the  ninth  commandment! 

A.  The  ninth  commandment  forbiddeth  whatsoever  is  pre* 
judicial  to  truth,  or  injurious  to  our  own  or  our  neighbour's 
good  name.0 

y  Ex.  xx.  16. 

z  Zech.  viii.  16  :  These  are  the  things  that  ye  shall  do,  Speak  ye  every  man  the 
truth  to  his  neighbour  ;  execute  the  judgment  of  truth  and  peace  in  your  gates. 

a  3  John,  ver.  12 :  Demetrius  hath  good  report  of  all  men.  and  of  the  truth 
itself  :  yea,  and  we  also  bear  record  ;  and  ye  know  that  our  record  is  true. 

b  Prov.  xiv.  5  :  A  faithful  witness  will  not  lie  :  but  a  false  witness  will  utter  lies. 
Ver.  25  :  A  true  witness  delivereth  souls  :  but  a  deceitful  witness  speaketh  lies. 

c  i  Sam.  xvii.  28  :  And  Eliab  his  eldest  brother  heard  when  he  spake  unto  the 
men :  and  Eliab's  anger  was  kindled  against  David,  and  he  said,  Why  earnest 
thou  down  hither?  and  with  whom  hast  thou  left  those  few  sheep  in  the  wilderness? 
I  know  thy  pride,  and  the  naughtiness  of  thine  heart  ;  for  thou  art  come  down 
that  thou  mightest  see  the  battle.  Lev.  xix.  16  :  Thou  shalt  not  go  up  and  down 
as  a  tale-bearer  among  thy  people  ;  neither  shalt  thou  stand  against  the  blood  of 
thy  neighbour :  I  am  the  Lord.  Ps.  xv.  3  :  He  that  backbiteth  not  with  his 
tongue,  nor  doeth  evil  to  his  neighbour,  nor  taketh  up  a  reproach  against  his 
neighbour. 

The  Larger  Catechism,  in  discussing  this  commandment,  calls  special  atten 
tion  to  imseaso nable  speech  or  loquacity,  tale-bearing,  backbiting,  detraction, 
aggravating  small  faults,  discovering  infirmities,  impairing  our  neighbour's 
credit,  and  rejoicing  in  their  disgrace  and  infamy.  The  whole  analysis  is  a 
terrible  indictment  laid  against  the  tongue  of  sinful  man. 

A  loquacious  man  is  one  who  speaks  much,  and  the  preacher  says  that  "  in 


THE   NINTH    COMMANDMENT.  149 

the  multitude  of  words  there  wanteth  not  sin. "  True,  a  multitude  of  words 
is  not  necessarily  of  itself  a  sin.  A  multitude  of  words  is  more  a  matter  of 
temperament  and  constitution  than  of  morals  or  religion.  But  then,  man 
kind  being  what  they  are,  a  talkative  tongue  becomes  to  many  a  tempta 
tion  and  a  snare.  Were  all  men's  minds  full  of  wisdom  and  knowledge,  then 
a  full  and  free  utterance  would  cause  no  injury;  but  a  talkative  tongue, 
rooted  in  a  selfish,  corrupt,  unloving  heart,  cannot  but  utter  much  folly  and 
sin.  Butler  points  out  that  loquacity  springs  from  "that  original  disease  of 
the  mind,  an  eager  desire  to  engage  attention."  In  his  sermon  On  the  Govern 
ment  of  the  Tongue,  this  great  ethical  writer  points  out  that  one  of  the  main 
mischiefs  of  a  loquacious  habit  of  speech  is  this,  that  the  necessity  to  be  always 
talking  tends  to  produce  tale-bearing. 

The  strong  idiomatic  word  backbiting  is  full  of  expressiveness.  This 
word  brings  out  strongly  the  meanness,  the  cowardice,  and  the  treachery  of 
the  conduct  it  condemns.  Pascal  says  that  if  everybody  knew  what  one  says 
about  another  behind  his  back,  there  would  not  be  four  friends  in  the  whole 
world.  Detraction,  "envy's  abhorred  child,"  is  a  very  common  kind  of 
backbiting.  The  etymology  here  also  is  very  expressive  and  instructive. 
Detraction  is  literally  to  draiv  aw ay  something  from  some  one,  and  in  this  case 
it  is  to  draw  away  some  praise,  or  honour,  or  esteem  from  the  good  name  of 
an  absent  man.  Butler  warns  us  that  the  "giving  of  characters"  makes  up 
too  much  of  our  conversation.  And  no  doubt  it  is  so,  since  depreciation  of 
our  neighbour's  merits  is  so  pleasant  to  us.  There  are  many  men  of  whom  it 
may  be  said  without  much  exaggeration,  "At  every  word  a  reputation  dies." 

"  Party  feeling,  whether  called  religious  zeal,  or  national  antagonism,  or 
political  creed,  becomes  simple  malice,  and  is  simply  devilish  when  it  leads 
us  not  only  to  condemn  opponents,  but  to  wish  that  they  may  be  really  as 
unworthy  as  history  or  rumour  makes  them,  to  court  and  hug  and  blaze 
abroad  every  tittle  of  evidence  which  tells  against  them,  and  to  turn  a  dull 
ear  to  everything  which  tells  in  their  favour.  Charity  rejoiceth  not  in 
iniquity,  but  rejoiceth  in  the  truth"  (Christina  Rossetti). 

This  evil  spirit  poisons  much  of  our  spoken  and  printed  criticism  and 
polemic.  Dr.  William  Cunningham  was  one  of  the  ablest  theological  and 
polemical  writers  that  our  Church  and  country  has  ever  seen,  and  he  did 
much  to  expound  and  establish  evangelical  truth,  and  to  chastise  its 
opponents,  but  he  never  wrote  a  nobler  passage  than  that  in  which  he  intro 
duced  a  second  castigation  of  Sir  William  Hamilton,  who  had  died  immediately 
after  the  publication  of  a  most  powerful  and  unanswerable  paper  against  him. 
"The  knowledge,"  Dr.  Cunningham  wrote,  "  if  we  had  possessed  it,  that  he 
was  to  die  so  soon,  would  assuredly  have  modified  somewhat  the  tone  in 
which  the  discussion  was  conducted, — would  have  shut  out  something  of  its 
lightness  and  severity,  and  imparted  to  it  more  of  solemnity  and  tenderness  ; 
and  the  knowledge  which  we  did  possess,  that  he,  as  well  as  ourselves,  was 
liable  every  day  to  be  called  out  of  this  world,  and  summoned  into  God's 
presence,  ought  to  have  produced  this  result." 

USES. — I.  "  Man  is  nothing  but  insincerity,  falsehood,  and  hypocrisy, 
both  in  regard  to  himself  and  in  regard  to  others.  He  does  not  wish 
that  he  should  be  told  the  truth  ;  he  shuns  saying  it  to  others  :  and  all 
these  moods,  so  inconsistent  with  justice  and  reason,  have  their  roots  in 
his  heart"  (Pascal). 

2.   "  What  is  almost  all  conversation  almost  everywhere,  but  a  breach  of  the 


150          THE    SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A    COMMENTARY. 

law  of  love?  Word  follows  word,  chasing  one  another,  sweeping  over 
one  another,  like  wave  on  wave ;  and  what  remains  in  the  memory  ? 
How  few  call  themselves  really,  evening  by  evening,  to  any  account !  It 
were  not  too  much  to  say  of  most  men,  that  they  are  '  curious  to  know 
the  lives  of  others,  slothful  to  amend  their  own'  "  (Pusey). 

3.  Eschew  as  much  as  possible  the  "giving  of  characters."    L 

4.  Garrulous  Plutarch  winds  up  his  essay  on  Garrulity  with  these  words  : 
"  Before  we  speak,  and  at  the  very  moment  when  the  words  are  ready  to 
break  out  of  our  mouths,  we  should  thus  address  ourselves,  What  is  this 
which  I  would  say  ?     What  is  this  which  presses  so  hard  to  be  uttered  ? 
For  what  reason  would  this  tongue  of  mine  so  fain  be  talking?     What 
mischief  shall  I  incur  by  holding  my  peace?     We  ought  always  to  bear 
in   remembrance,  and  have   at   our  tongue's   end,   that  saying   of  the 
philosopher  that  he  had  often  repented  him  of  talking,  but  never  once  of 
keeping  silence." 

5.  Augustine  tells  us  in  his   Confessions  how  much  his  mother  abhorred 
everything  like  slander,  and  the  fruit  of  her  counsels  and  example  on  her 
great  son  was,   that  long  after  her  death,  he  caused  these  lines  to  be 
carved  on  the  table  at  which  his  guests  sat  : 

"  He  that  is  wont  to  slander  absent  men, 
May  never  at  this  table  sit  again  " 

6.  "Judge  not  without  knowledge,  charity,  or  necessity  ;  yet  a  dog  is  to  b<? 
accounted  a  dog,  and  a  swine  a  swine"  (Bengel). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Derive  and  illustrate  the  following  words,  all  of  which  describe  breaches  of  the 
ninth    commandment:— Misconstruction,   Misrepresentation,   Exaggeration,  Detrac 
tion,  Defamation,  Insinuation,  Prejudice. 

2.  Explain  Pope's  line: 

At  every  word  a  reputation  dies. 
8.  Commit  the  verse: 

If  wisdom's  ways  you  wisely  seek, 

Five  things  observe  with  care; 
Of  whom  you  speak,  to  whom  you  speak, 

And  how,  and  when,  and  where. 

4.  Q.  What  is  the  first  inference  from  thence  ? — A.  That  the  best  Christians  have 
cause  to  be  humbled  for  sins  of  the  tongue,  whereby  God  is  dishonoured,  and  others 
are  injured  (Jas.  Hi.).     Q.    What  is  the  next  inference  ? — /4.  To  bless   God  that  our 
names  are  kept  sweet  and  honourable  in  the  world  among  good  men  (3  John  12). 

5.  Read   Butler's    sermon  Upon   the  Government   of   the  Tongue ;   also  Matthew 
Henry's  description  of  the  citizen  of  Zion  (Ps.  xu.  3). 


Q.  79.    Which  is  the  tenth  commandment  ? 

A.  The  tenth  commandment  is,  Thou  slialt  not  covet  thy 
neighbours  house,  thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  wife,  nor 
his  man-servant,  nor  his  maid-servant,  nor  his  ox,  nor  his  ass,  nor 
any  thing  that  is  thy  neighbour's^ 

d  Ex.  xx.  17. 


THE   TENTH    COMMANDMENT.  151 

Q.  80.    What  is  required  in  the  tenth  commandment1! 

A.  The  tenth  commandment  requireth  full  contentment  with 
our  own  condition,6  with  a  right  and  charitable  frame  of  spirit 
toward  our  neighbour,  and  all  that  is  his.f 

Q.  8 1.    What  is  forbidden  in  the  tenth  commandment ? 

A.  The  tenth  commandment  forbiddeth  all  discontentment 
with  our  own  estate,^  envying  or  grieving  at  the  good  of  our 
neighbour,11  and  all  inordinate  motions  and  affections  to  any 
thing  that  is  his.1 

c  Heb.  xiii.  5  :  Let  your  conversation  be  without  covetousness  ;  and  be  content 
with  such  things  as  ye  have  :  for  he  hath  said,  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake 
thee.  i  Tim.  vi.  6  :  But  godliness  with  contentment  is  great  gain. 

1  Job  xxxi.  29 :  If  I  rejoiced  at  the  destruction  of  him  that  hated  me,  or  lifted 
up  myself  when  evil  found  him.  Rom.  xii.  15  :  Rejoice  with  them  that  do  rejoice, 
and  weep  with  them  that  weep,  i  Tim.  i.  5  :  Now  the  end  of  the  commandment 
is  charity  out  of  a  pure  heart,  and  of  a  good  conscience,  and  of  faith  unfeigned, 
i  Cor.  xiii.  4-7. 

R  i  Kings  xxi.  4  :  And  Ahab  came  into  his  house  heavy  and  displeased  because 
of  the  word  which  Naboth  the  Jezreelite  had  spoken  to  him  ;  for  he  had  said,  I 
will  not  give  thee  the  inheritance  of  my  fathers :  and  he  laid  him  down  upon  his 
bed,  and  turned  away  his  face,  and  would  eat  no  bread.  Esth.  v.  13  :  Yet  all 
this  availeth  me  nothing,  so  long  as  I  see  Mordecai  the  Jew  sitting  at  the  king's 
gate,  i  Cor.  x.  10 :  Neither  murmur  ye,  as  some  of  them  also  murmured,  and 
were  destroyed  of  the  destroyer. 

h  Gal.  v.  26 :  Let  us  not  be  desirous  of  vainglory,  provoking  one  another, 
envying  one  another.  Jas.  iii.  14 :  But  if  ye  have  bitter  envying  and  strife  in  your 
hearts,  glory  not,  and  lie  not  against  the  truth.  Ver.  16  :  For  where  envying  and 
strife  is,  there  is  confusion,  and  every  evil  work. 

*  Rom.  vii.  7 :  I  had  not  known  lust,  except  the  law  had  said,  Thou  shall  not 
covet.  Ver.  8  :  But  sin,  taking  occasion  by  the  commandment,  wrought  in  me 
all  manner  of  concupiscence.  For  without  the  law  sin  was  dead.  Rom.  xiii.  9  : 
For  this  .  .  .  Thou  shall  not  covet ;  and  if  there  be  any  other  commandment,  it 
is  briefly  comprehended  in  this  saying,  namely,  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as 
thyself.  Deut.  v.  21 :  Neither  shalt  thou  desire  thy  neighbour's  wife,  neither 
shalt  thou  covet  thy  neighbour's  house,  his  field,  or  his  man-servant,  or  his  maid 
servant,  his  ox,  or  his  ass,  or  any  thing  that  is  thy  neighbour's. 

A  peculiar  interest  attaches  to  the  tenth  commandment,  from  the  fact  that 
it  was  the  chief  instrument  employed  by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  awakening 
and  conversion  of  the  Apostle  Paul.  In  that  priceless  fragment  of  his 
religious  autobiography  contained  in  the  seventh  chapter  of  his  Epistle  to  the 
Romans,  the  apostle  tells  us  that,  notwithstanding  all  his  religious  upbringing, 
and  notwithstanding  all  his  sacred  studies  in  Gamaliel's  school,  he  never 
discovered'that  he  himself  was  a  sinner,  he  did  not  so  much  as  know  what  sin 
was,  till  the  tenth  commandment  came  home  to  him,  saying,  "  Thou  shalt  not 
covet."  "  I  was  alive,"  so  his  famous  confession  runs, — "  I  was  alive  without 
the  law  once,  but  when  the  tenth  commandment  came  home  to  me,  sin  revived, 
and  I  died.  And  ever  since  then,  and  until  now,  I  have  known  that  the  law 
is  spiritual,  but  I  am  carnal,  sold  under  sin.  O  wretched  man  that  I  am  ! " 
Saul  of  Tarsus,  the  scrupulous,  studious,  ambitious  young  Pharisee,  could 


152          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

make  answer  to  all  the  other  commandments  in  the  Decalogue,  "All  these 
have  I  kept  from  my  youth  up."  But  the  tenth  commandment  came  to  him 
like  a  two-edged  sword,  discerning  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  his  heart. 
Humanly  speaking,  we  owe  the  Apostle  Paul,  with  all  his  wiitings,  to  the 
awakening  and  searching  power  of  the  tenth  commandment. 

"The  universal  prohibition  of  theft  seemed  weighty  enough  to  occupy  the 
eighth  place  in  the  ten  fundamental  commandments  of  Jehovahism ;  and  as 
the  true  religion  felt  that  there  was  more  to  be  required  than  the  avoidance  of 
open  transgression,  it  also  prohibited  in  the  tenth  and  last  fundamental  law  every 
sinful  desire  for  whatever  was  the  property  of  another,  and  thus  condemned 
the  first  step  to  countless  open  or  secret  offences  which  no  law  can  enumerate 
and  punish  "  (Ewald). 

requireth  full  contentment  with  our  own  condition— Like  so  many  other 
moral  and  spiritual  expressions,  this  term  contentment  has  a  physical  basis,  a 
material  origin  and  root.  We  speak  of  one  thing  being  contained  in  another 
when  it  is  held  within  it,  and  does  not  exceed  or  overflow  its  bounds.  The 
contents  of  a  vessel,  for  instance,  are  just  what  the  vessel  is  able  to  hold. 
And  our  scriptural  and  Catechism  term  contentment  has  just  the  same  mean 
ing.  A  contented  mind  is  a  mind  that  does  not  overflow,  push  itself  out  of, 
and  wander  beyond  the  conditions  and  limits  within  which  it  is  providentially 
placed.  A  contented  mind  has  all  it  wants  ;  or  if  it  has  some  wants  still 
unsupplied,  it  surrenders  its  desires  without  rebellion  or  complaint,  and 
wishes  for  nothing  it  has  not  been  permitted  to  possess.  And  thus  it  comes 
about  that  if  the  contented  mind  has  not  full  and  perfect  satisfaction  in  its 
outward  possessions,  it  has  what  is  far  better,  it  has  inward  detachment, 
acquiescence,  and  peace. 

"  Now  as  they  were  going  along  and  talking,  they  espied  a  Boy  feeding 
his  Father's  sheep.  The  Boy  was  in  very  mean  cloathes,  but  of  a  very  fresh 
and  well-favoured  countenance,  and  as  he  sate  by  himself  he  sung.  Hark, 
said  Mr.  Greatheart,  to  what  the  Shepherd's  Boy  saith.  So  they  hearkened, 
and  he  said  : — 

"  He  that  is  down  needs  fear  no  fall ; 

He  that  is  low,  no  pride  : 
He  that  is  humble,  ever  shall 
Have  God  to  be  his  Guide. 

"  I  am  content  with  what  I  have, 

Little  be  it  or  much  : 
And,  Lord,  contentment  still  I  crave, 
Because  Thou  savest  such. 

"  Fulness  to  such  a  burden  is 

That  go  on  pilgrimage  : 
Here  little,  and  hereafter  bliss, 
Is  best  from  age  to  age. 

Then  said  their  Guide,  Do  you  hear  him  ?  I  will  dare  to  say,  that  this 
Boy  lives  a  merrier  life,  and  wears  more  of  that  herb  called  Hearts-ease  in  his 
bosom,  than  he  that  is  clad  in  silk  and  velvet." 

a  right  and  charitable  frame  of  spirit — "When  those  two  quarrelling 
pronouns,  meum  and  tuum  (mine  and  thine),  have  no  more  use,  as  in  heaven, 
then  we  shall  fully  rejoice  in  one  another's  gifts  and  graces,  and  what  olhers 
enjoy  will  be  our  comfort "  (Manton). 


THE   TENTH   COMMANDMENT.  153 

"  Envy  bloweth  up  the  sighs  of  men. 
No  fear  of  that  might  touch  ye,  if  the  love 
Of  higher  spheres  exalted  your  desire. 
For  there,  by  how  much  more  they  cull  it  ours, 
So  much  propriety  of  each  in  good 
Encreases  more,  and  heightened  charity 
Wraps  that  fair  cloister  iu  a  brighter  flame." 

—DANTE. 

forbiddeth  envying  or  grieving  at  the  good  of  our  neighbour— The 

Bible  gives  to  envy  its  true  etymology  when  it  calls  it  "an  evil  eye."  For 
this  "  worst  of  the  passions  "  is  kindled  through  the  eye,  the  eye  of  the  body 
or  the  eye  of  the  mind.  The  envious  eye  sees  the  welfare  of  another  with 
an  evil  grudge. 

"  Base  Envy  withers  at  another's  joy, 
And  hates  that  excellence  it  cannot  reach." 

Thomas  Adams,  in  his  Soufs  Sickness,  tells  us  of  a  certain  philosopher 
who,  on  seeing  an  envious  man  dejected,  asked  him  whether  some  evil  had 
happened  to  himself,  or  some  good  to  his  neighbour.  (See  the  noble  cantos, 
xiii.,  xiv.,  xv.  of  The  Purgatory.') 

all  inordinate  motions  and  affections— Inordinate,  out  of  order,  dis 
orderly,  excessive.  The  word  occurs  twice  in  the  Scriptures,  Ezek.  xxiii.  1 1  j 
Col.  iii.  5.  Motions  also  occurs  in  Rom.  vii.  5. 

USES. —  I.  All  moralists,  Pagan  and  Christian,  tell  us  that  contentment 
with  his  own  estate  is  not  natural  to  any  human  being.  Indifference, 
asceticism,  stoicism,  despondency,  despair, — these  states  of  mind  are  all 
quite  natural  to  man,  but  none  of  all  these  approach  to  true  contentment. 
True  contentment  must  rest  on  a  religious  foundation.  And  it  is  only 
when  from  a  religious  resignation  a  devout  and  patient  man  rises  to  true 
Christian  contentment,  only  when  he  sees  that  all  his  times  are  in  the 
hand  of  Jesus  Christ,  only  then  does  contentment  come  to  its  maturity 
and  fruitfulness.  "I  have  learned,"  says  the  apostle,  "  in  whatsoever 
state  I  am,  therewith  to  be  content.  ...  I  can  do  all  things  through 
Christ  which  strengtheneth  me." 

2.  Rich  men,  talented  men,   successful  men  should  alleviate  as  much  as 
possible  the  temptations  they  cause  to  their  less  able  and  less  fortunate 
fellows.     And  this  they  can  largely  do  by  studying  humbleness  of  mind, 
by  a  steady  and  habitual  consideration  of  the  circumstances  and  feelings 
of  others,  and  by  making  as  much  as  may  be  made  of  the  talents  and 
performances  of  their  neighbours. 

3.  This  commandment  is  of  the  greatest  use  as  a  test  and  gauge  of  an 
awakened  heart  and  a  spiritual  mind.     When  an  envious  feeling  or  an 
inordinate  desire  springs  up  suddenly  and  involuntarily  in  the  soul,  and 
when  it  is  struggled  against  till  it  is  cast  out,  and  when  after  being  cast 
out  it  still  leaves  a  stain  and  a  wound  behind  it,  and  drives  us  to  the 
blood  and  righteousness  of  Christ,  what  could  be  a  surer  mark  of  the 
reality  and  depth  of  the  work  of  grace  in  the  heart  ?     Nothing. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Reconcile  this  commandment  with  7  Cor.  xii.  31a. 

2.  Walh  with  Virgil  and  Dante  round  the  second  buttress  of  the  mount  that  healeth 
him  who  climbs;  and  explain  these  utterances  heard  by  the  seen — 


154         THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

Though  Sapia  nam'cl, 
In  sapience  I  excell'd  not;  gladder  far 
Of  others'  hurt,  than  of  the  good  befell  myself. 

Guido  of  Duca,  know  then  that  I  am. 

Envy  so  parched  my  blood,  that  had  I  seen 

A  fellow-man  made  joyous,  thou  hadst  mark'd 

A  livid  paleness  overspread  my  cheek. 

Such  harvest  reap  I  of  the  seed  I  sowed. 

Sick  of  a  strange  disease,  my  neighbour's  health. 

3.  Study  Bacon's  Essay  Of  Envie,  and  note  what  Butler  says  of  peevishness  in  his 
sermon  Upon  Resentment. 

4.  Derive  and  explain  the  allusion :  Like  the  dog  in  the  manger. 

5.  Commit  the  Paraphrase  of  Habakkuk's  noble  peroration;  also  the  Song  of  the 
Shepherd  Boy  in  the  Valley  of  Humiliation. 

6.  Commit  the  following  short  form  of  the  commandments,   which  was  written  by 
Isaac  Watts,  and  was  learned  in  most  elementary  schools  in  England  half  a  century 
ago : 

The  Ten  Commandments  out  of  the  Old  Testament  put  into  Short  Rhyme 

for  Children.    Exodus,  chapter  xx. 
1.  Thou  shalt  not  have  more  gods  but  Me. 
2,.  Before  no  idol  bow  the  knee. 

3.  Take  not  the  name  of  God  in  vain. 

4.  Nor  dare  the  Sabbath  day  profane. 

5.  Give  both  thy  parents  honour  due. 

6.  Take  heed  that  you  no  murder  do. 

7.  Abstain  from  words  and  deeds  unclean. 

8.  Nor  steal,  though  thou  art  poor  and  mean. 

9.  Nor  make  a  wilful  lie,  nor  love  it. 

10.  What  is  thy  neighbour's  do  not  covet. 


Q.  82.  Is  any  man  able  perfectly  to  keep  the  commandments  oj 
God? 

A.  No  mere  man  since  the  fall  is  able  in  this  life  perfectly  to 
keep  the  commandments  of  God,J  but  doth  daily  break  them  in 
thought,  word,  and  deed.k 

1  Eccles.  vii.  20  :  For  there  is  not  a  just  man  upon  earth,  that  doeth  good,  and 
sinneth  not.  i  John  i.  8  :  If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves, 
and  the  truth  is  not  in  us.  Ver.  10 :  If  we  say  that  we  have  not  sinned,  we  make 
him  a  liar,  and  his  word  is  not  in  us.  Gal.  v.  17 :  For  the  flesh  lusteth  against 
the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against  the  flesh  :  and  these  are  contrary  the  one  to  the 
other :  so  that  ye  cannot  do  the  things  that  ye  would. 

k  Gen.  vi.  5  :  And  God  saw  that  the  wickedness  of  man  was  great  in  the  earth, 
and  that  every  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  was  only  evil  continually. 
Gen.  viii.  21 :  The  imagination  of  man's  heart  is  evil  from  his  youth.  Rom. 
iii.  9  :  What  then?  are  we  better  than  they?  No,  in  no  wise  :  for  we  have  before 
proved  both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  that  they  are  all  under  sin. — And  so  on  to  verse  21. 
Jas.  iii.  2  :  For  in  many  things  we  offend  all.  If  any  man  offend  not  in  word,  the 
same  is  a  perfect  man,  and  able  also  to  bridle  the  whole  body. — And  so  on  to 
verse  13. 

No  mere  man — "That  admirable  discrimination,  united  with  conciseness 
and  perspicuity,  which  characterizes  the  whole  of  our  Shorter  Catechism,  is 


NO    MAN    ABLE   TO    KEEP    THE    COMMANDMENTS.  155 

strikingly  visible  in  the  Answer  before  us  "(Dr.  Ashbel  Green).  It  would 
not  have  been  scriptural  to  have  said  no  man  since  the  fall,  because  our  Lord 
was  a  man.  But  then  He  was  not  a  mere  man,  for  He  was  God  and  man. 
This  limiting  term  corresponds  to  the  third  clause  in  Answer  16,  "all  man 
kind  descending  from  Adam  by  ordinary  generation."  (See  also  Answers 

21,  22.) 

since  the  fall — It  was  necessary  also  that  this  clause  should  stand  here, 
because  man  and  mere  man,  Adam  and  Eve  namely,  were  able  perfectly  to 
keep  the  commandments  of  God,  and  for  a  season  they  did  actually  keep 
them.  (See  Answer  10.)  But  no  mere  man  since  they  fell  has  even  approxi 
mately  kept  the  commandments  of  God.  (See  Answers  16,  17,  18.) 

is  able  in  this  life — Here  again  we  sec  the  discrimination,  conciseness, 
and  perspicuity  celebrated  above.  For  a  multitude  that  no  man  can  number 
of  mere  men  will  in  the  life  to  come  be  able  to  keep  in  thought  and  word 
and  deed  all  the  commandments  of  God.  (See  Answer  38.)  But  the  doc 
trine  of  the  Catechism  is  a  sad  truth,  and  it  is  put  still  more  explicitly  in  the 
Larger  Catechism  Answer  :  "No  man  is  able,  either  of  himself,  or  by  any 
grace  received  in  this  life,  perfectly  to  keep  the  commandments." 

perfectly  to  keep  the  commandments  of  God — This  well-chosen  phrase 
recognizes  the  cheering  and  inspiriting  truth  that  God's  people  are  enabled 
and  endeavour  to  keep  His  commandments  increasingly,  while  on  the  other 
hand  it  teaches  the  humiliating  fact  that  no  complete  or  adequate  success  is 
ever  in  this  world  attained  by  any  man  with  his  best  endeavour.  The 
language  of  Richard  Hooker  is  found  in  the  mouth  of  every  child  of  God  : 
"  The  little  fruit  which  we  have  in  holiness,  it  is,  God  knoweth,  corrupt  and 
unsound ;  we  put  no  confidence  at  all  in  it ;  we  challenge  nothing  in  the 
world  for  it ;  we  dare  not  call  God  to  reckoning,  as  if  we  had  Him  in  our 
debt-books ;  our  continual  suit  to  Him  is,  and  must  be,  to  bear  with  our 
infirmities,  and  pardon  our  offences." 

but  doth  daily  break  them— There  are  three  transgressions,  say  the  Tal- 
mudists,  from  which  a  man  can  no  day  ever  in  this  life  be  free  :  the  thoughts 
of  sin,  wanderings  in  prayer,  and  an  evil  tongue. 

in  thought,  word,  and  deed.  See  Answer  18.  "  All  the  sins  which  men 
commit  are  reducible  to  three  heads,  as  being  either  in  thought,  in  word,  or  in 
deed"  (Waterland).  "If  our  hands  did  never  offer  violence  to  our  brethren, 
a  bloody  thought  doth  prove  us  murderers  before  God  :  if  we  had  never  opened 
our  mouths  to  utter  any  scandalous,  offensive,  or  hurtful  word,  the  cry  of  our 
secret  cogitations  is  heard  in  His  ears.  If  we  did  not  commit  the  evils  which 
we  do  daily  and  hourly,  either  in  deeds,  words,  or  thoughts,  yet  in  the  good 
things  which  we  do,  how  many  defects  are  there  intermingled  !  ...  It  may 
seem  somewhat  extreme  which  I  will  speak  ;  therefore  let  every  man  judge 
of  it,  even  as  his  own  heart  shall  tell  him,  and  no  otherwise  ;  I  will  but  only 
make  a  demand  :  If  God  should  yield  to  us,  not  as  unto  Abraham ;  if  fifty, 
forty,  thirty,  twenty,  yea,  if  ten  good  persons  could  be  found  in  a  city,  foi 
their  sakes  that  city  should  not  be  destroyed  ;  but  if  God  should  make  us  an 
offer  thus  large  :  Search  all  the  generations  of  man  sithever  the  fall  of  your 
father  Adam,  find  one  man  that  hath  done  any  one  action,  which  hath  past 
from  him  pure,  without  any  stain  or  blemish  at  all ;  and  for  that  man's  one 
only  action,  neither  man  nor  angel  shall  feel  the  torments  that  are  prepared 


156          THE    SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

for  bolh ;  do  you  think  that  this  ransom,  to  deliver  men  and  angels,  would 
be  found  among  the  sons  of  men  ?  "  (Hooker). 

But  see  the  whole  of  A  Learned  Discourse  of  Justification  by  this  master 
of  English  and  of  evangelical  truth.  And  masterly  as  this  passage  is, 
Christian's  Conversation  with  Ignorance  on  the  same  subject  is  worthy  to 
stand  beside  it. 

"  I  in  Man  residing  through  the  race, 
His  thoughts,  his  looks,  words,  actions,        infect."_ 

— SIN  in  Paradise  Lost 

USES. — i.  "I  will  never  forget  Thy  precepts,  for  with  them  Thou  hast 
quickened  me.  .  .  .  Through  Thy  precepts  I  get  understanding ; 
therefore  I  hate  every  false  way  "  (The  Psalmist). 

2.  "A  true  Christian  hath  ten  times  more  to  do  with  his  heart  and  its 
corruptions  than  a  hypocrite  has.     The  sins  of  his  heart  and  life  appear 
to  him  in  their  awful  blackness     they  look  dreadful ;  and  it  often  ap 
pears  to  him  a  very  mysterious  thing  that  any  grace  can  be  consistent 
with  such  corruption,  or  should  live  at  all  in  such  a  heart "  (Jonathan 
Edwards). 

3.  "The  very  smallest  of  our  Lord's  commandments  are   to  a  spiritual 
mind  solemn,  arduous,  and  inexhaustible.  .  .   .   How  manifold  are  the 
ways  of  the  Spirit,  how   various  the  grace  which    He   imparts  ;  what 
depth  and  width  is  there  in  that  moral  truth  and  virtue  for  which  we 
are  created  !  "  (Newman). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Point  out  the  exact  significance  and  great  importance  of  the  limiting  clauses  :  No 
mere  man,  since  the  fall,  is  able  in  this  life,  perfectly  to  keep. 

2.  Hengstenberg  points  out  that  this  trilogy  of  thought  and  word  and  deed  runs 
through  the  whole  Decalogue.    Trace  it. 

3.  Since  all  sin  is   reducible  to   one  or  other  of  the  three   categories  given  in  the 
text,  giue  examples  of  each  taken  from  Scripture. 

4.  Write  out  a  criticism  on  the  following  passage  taken  from   Josephus : — Whence 
one  may  wonder  at  Polybius,   who,   though  otherwise  a  good  man,   yet   saith 
that   "  Antiochus  died  because   he   had   a   purpose  to   plunder  the   Temple   of 
Diana  in   Persia;"   for  the  purposing  to  do  a   thing,  but  not  actually  doing 
it,  is  not  worthy  of  punishment.     Compare  the  Conversation  between  Prudence  and 
Christian. 

'  5.  Explain  the  following  scriptures,  and  reconcile  their  teaching  with  the  doctrine  of 
the  Catechism  .-—That  man  was  perfect  and  upright  (Job  i.  1).  I  am  holy  (Ps. 
Ixxxui.  2).  They  wore  both  righteous  before  God,  walking  in  all  the  command 
ments  and  ordinances  of  the  Lord  blameless  (Luke  i.  6).  I  have  lived  in  all  good 
conscience  before  God  until  this  day  (Acts  xxiii.  1).  He  cannot  sin,  because  he  is 
born  of  God  (1  John  Hi.  9). 

6.  Explain  Goodwin's  saying :  Evil  thoughts  are  the  eldest  children  of  original 
Sin ;  and  ponder  and  make  self-application  of  Prou.  xxiii.  7. 


Q.  83.  Are  all  transgressions  of  the  laiv  equally  heinous'} 
A.  Some  sins  in  themselves,  and  by  reason  of  several  aggrava 
tions,  are  more  heinous  in  the  sight  of  God  than  others.1 

1  Ezek.  viii.  6-15.     i  John  v.  16  :  If  any  man  see  his  brother  sin  a  sin  which  is 
not  unto  death,  he  shall  ask,  and  he  shall  give  him  life  for  them  that  sin  not  unto 


HEINOUS   SINS.  157 

death.  There  is  a  sin  unto  death  :  I  do  not  say  that  he  shall  pray  for  it.  Ps. 
Ixxviii  17  :  And  they  sinned  yet  more  against  him,  by  provoking  the  Most  High 
in  the  wilderness.  Ver.  32  :  For  all  this  they  sinned  still,  and  believed  not  for  his 
wondrous  works.  Ver.  56  :  Yet  they  tempted  and  provoked  the  most  high  God, 
and  kept  not  his  testimonies. 

Some  sins  in  themselves—"  The  Stoic  philosophers,  and  some  few  of  the 
less  considerate  Christians,  have  pretended  that  all  sins  are  equal.  Their 
reasons  for  it  are  not  worth  the  mentioning ;  for  the  conceit  is  so  groundless, 
and  so  repugnant  to  the  common  sense  of  mankind,  that  barely  to  speak  of 
it  is  to  expose  it,  and  it  carries  its  own  confutation  with  it.  For  a  man 
must  be  very  weak  to  imagine  that  theft ^  suppose,  is  as  great  a  sin  as  murder ; 
or  telling  a  lie  as  wicked  a  thing  as  robbing  a  house,  or  plundering  a  church,  or 
firing  a  toivn.  Everybody  is  sensible  of  a  difference  between  high  crimes  and 
trivial  trespasses ;  between  sins  of  the  first  magnitude  and  slight  offences  ; 
our  Lord  therefore  compares  some  to  gnats,  while  He  compares  others  to 
camels  ;  some  to  motes  in  the  eye,  others  to  beams  "  (Waterland). 

and  by  reason  of  several  aggravations— To  aggravate  is  to  add  to  what  is 
too  heavy  already.  Thus  in  Bacon:  "The  offence  was  aggravated  by  the 
motive."  The  Larger  Catechism  has  a  most  instructive  discussion  of  this 
subject  under  these  heads  :  Sins  receive  their  aggravations — I.  From  the 
persons  offending.  2.  From  the  parties  offended.  3.  From  the  nature  and 
quality  of  the  offence.  4.  From  circumstances  of  time  and  place.  Earnest 
students  will  master  the  remarkable  analysis  and  exposition  in  Answer  151. 
And  those  who  wish  to  go  yet  deeper  into  this  solemn  question  are  recommended 
to  read  Dr.  Thomas  Goodwin's  three  treatises — "Aggravation  of  Sin," 
"Aggravations  of  sinning  against  Knowledge,"  and  "Aggravations  of 
sinning  against  Mercy,"  in  the  fourth  volume  of  his  Works. 

more  heinous — Old  Saxon  for  hateful,  odious,  atrocious.  The  word 
occurs  once  and  once  only  in  Scripture  (Job  xxxi.  n).  "  Actions  gross  and 
great  for  bulk  are  often  less  sinful  in  the  eyes  of  God  than  smaller  actions, 
because  less  filled  with  the  evil  disposition  of  the  heart.  And  thus  the 
philosophers  themselves  acknowledged  that  an  evil  action  clone,  ex  pravA 
dispositione,  an  act  proceeding  from  a  rooted  habitual  disposition,  was  worse, 
and  more  to  be  punished  than  another,  though  outwardly  as  bad,  if  but  clone 
out  of  some  sudden  passion,  as  they  call  it.  Witness  that  sentence  of  the 
Athenian  judges,  who  condemned  a  boy  to  death  but  for  tearing  out  in  a  cruel 
manner  the  eyes  of  a  few  crows  and  partridges,  as  being  (though  for  the 
act  but  small)  the  evidence  and  indicium  of  a  habitual  cruel  nature" 
(Goodwin). 

USES. — I.  "  I  would  recommend  to  you,  my  young  friends,  as  a  very  pro 
fitable  employment  for  an  hour  on  the  Lord's  day,  to  go  over  deliberately 
this  enumeration  of  the  aggravations  of  sin,  contained  in  your  Larger 
Catechism  ;  to  consider  each  article  attentively ;  to  connect  it  with  an 
intelligent  reading  of  the  Scripture  proof,  to  which  you  will  find  a 
reference,  and  with  a  serious  meditation  on  the  whole"  (Dr.  Ashbel 
Green). 

2.  "  Q.  Are  heinous  and  crying  sins  capable  of  forgiveness?—^.  Yes; 
great  and  heinous  sins  are  capable  of  forgiveness  upon  true  repentance 
(Isa.  i.  18).  (>.  What  is  the  first  inference  hence  ? — A.  Though  some 


158          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

sins  are  more  heinous  than  others,  yet  no  sinner  should  absolutely 
despair  of  mercy ;  for  the  vilest  have  been  pardoned  (i  Cor.  vi.  n). 
Q.  What  is  the  next  inference  ? — A.  That  great  sinners  when  pardoned 
and  received  to  mercy,  should  excel  all  others  in  love  to  Christ  (Luke 
vii.  42,  43)  "  (Flavel). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Establish  from  Scripture  and  reason  Goodwin's  proposition :  My  brethren,  the 
greatest  sins  of  all  are  in  the  understanding.     Illustrate  this  also :  Circumstances 
lie  heavier  on  the  soul  than  the  act. 

2.  Explain  and  illustrate  Manton's  metaphor:  The  dye  is  sometimes  more  than  the 
stuff. 


Q.  84.    What  doth  every  sin  deserve  ? 

A.  Every  sin  deserveth  God's  wrath  and  curse,  both  in  this 
life,  and  that  which  is  to  come.m 

m  Eph.  v.  6:  Because  of  these  things  cometh  the  wrath  of  God  upon  the 
children  of  disobedience.  Gal.  iii.  10 :  For  as  many  as  are  of  the  works  of  the  law 
are  under  the  curse  :  for  it  is  written,  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in 
all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them.  Lam.  iii.  39  : 
Wherefore  doth  a  living  man  complain,  a  man  for  the  punishment  of  his  sins  ? 
Matt.  xxv.  41  :  Then  shall  he  say  also  unto  them  on  the  left  hand,  Depart  from 
me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels. 

Every  sin  deserveth — This  Answer  only  casts  into  a  form  of  words  fitting 
its  place  in  the  development  of  catechetical  doctrine  what  is  the  universal 
teaching  of  Scripture  on  the  nature  and  heinousness  of  sin.  James,  the  least 
doctrinal,  so  to  say,  and  the  most  entirely  ethical  of  all  the  apostles,  more 
than  sustains  the  teaching  of  the  text  in  that  famous  passage  in  which  he  sets 
forth  the  solidarity  and  inviolability  of  the  divine  law  :  "  For  whosoever  shall 
keep  the  whole  law,  and  yet  offend  in  one  point,  he  is  guilty  of  all."  "  What 
he  means  is,  that  God  will  not  be  honoured  with  exceptions,  nor  will  He 
allow  us  to  cut  off  from  His  law  what  is  less  pleasing  to  us "  (Calvin).  "  For 
every  one  vice  kills  the  soul,  though  every  virtue  does  not  make  alive.  A 
man  is  spotted  although  he  have  but  one  stain  :  he  is  not  clean  unless  he  be 
all  clean.  A  cup  is  broken  if  only  the  top  is  broken,  but  it  is  not  entire 
unless  every  part  of  it  is  inviolate"  (Taylor).  "The  favourite  notion  of 
many  people,  that  the  province  of  morals  recognizes  a  greater  or  a  smaller 
number  of  adiaphora  [unimportant  and  indifferent  matters],  is  here  emphati 
cally  denied"  (Lange).  "If  indeed  there  be  deeper  and  deeper  dyes  of 
guilt  :  which,  though  it  be  a  true  idea  to  a  creature  already  in  a  fallen  state, 
is  not  so,  as  I  take  it,  to  a  creature  who  hath  not  fallen,  to  whom  any 
insurrection  of  the  will,  or  disobedience  of  the  act,  doth  constitute  the  very 
essence  and  substance  of  sin,  which  may  afterwards  be  varied  by  particular 
accidents,  but  cannot,  as  I  take  it,  be  changed  in  its  essence  "  (Edward  Irving). 

"It  is  well  to  observe  how  apparently  slight  a  fault  it  was  for  which  Moses 
suffered  :  for  this  shows  us  the  infinite  difference  between  the  best  of  a  sinful 
race  and  Him  who  was  sinless, — the  least  taint  of  human  corruption  having 
in  it  an  unspeakable  evil "  (Newman)  This  great  writer  also  preaches  the 
"inconceivable  evil  of  sensuality." 


WHAT   EVERY   SIN    DESERVETH.  159 

Clod's  wrath  —  See  Answer  19.  Such  words  and  thoughts  as  these 
are  to  be  purged  as  far  as  may  be  of  all  association  with  human 
passion  and  corruption.  We  cannot,  in  the  nature  of  things,  escape 
the  limitation  and  taint  of  human  ideas  and  attributes  when  we  think 
or  speak  of  God  ;  but  the  safest  way  is  to  keep  close  to  scriptural  usage 
and  example,  and  above  all  to  study  the  revelation  of  God  in  His  love  and 
in  His  hatred,  in  His  cursing  and  in  His  blessing,  as  He  is  revealed  to  us  in 
the  character,  and  works,  and  words  of  His  Incarnate  Son  Jesus  Christ.  ' '  The 
Baptist  he  began  that  style  in  the  New  Testament — the  wrath  to  come — by 
way  of  distinction  from  all  that  is  executed  in  this  life.  And  the  whole  New 
Testament  afterwards  much  useth  this  phrase.  ...  I  shall  but  further  super- 
add  that  noticed  saying  of  Luther,  which  out  of  a  deep  experience  of  the 
wrath  of  God  in  his  soul  at  his  first  humiliation  and  conversion  he  had  learned  : 
The  wrath  of  God  is  hell,  the  hell  of  devils  and  all  damned  spirits  "  (Goodwin). 

"By  anger,  wrath,  zeal,  fury,  the  effects  of  anger  are  denoted.  Anger  and 
wrath  are  not  properly  ascribed  to  God,  but  metaphorically,  denoting  partly 
His  vindicatory  justice,  whence  all  punishments  flow  ;  partly  the  effects  of 
it  in  the  punishments  themselves"  (Owen).  "Many  schools  of  religion  and 
ethics  are  to  be  found  amongst  us,  and  they  all  profess  to  magnify,  in  one 
shape  or  other,  what  they  consider  the  principle  of  love ;  but  what  they  lack 
is,  a  firm  maintenance  of  that  characteristic  of  the  Divine  Nature,  which,  in 
accommodation  to  our  infirmity,  is  named  by  St.  John  and  his  brethren  the 
wrath  of  God.  .  .  .  Hence  they  consider  all  punishment  to  be  remedial,  a 
means  to  an  end  ;  deny  that  the  woe  threatened  against  sinners  is  of  eternal 
duration,  and  explain  away  the  doctrine  of  the  Atonement "  (Newman). 
"  From  the  notion  of  -wrath)  when  it  is  applied  to  God,  we  must,  of  course, 
remove  all  that  pollutes  human  wrath,  personal  resentment,  and  revenge.  In 
God,  who  is  the  living  good,  wrath  appears  as  the  holy  disapprobation  of  evil, 
and  the  firm  resolve  to  destroy  it;  But  it  is  false  to  say,  as  is  often  said,  that 
this  divine  emotion  applies  only  to  the  evil  and  not  to  the  evil-doer.  The 
voluntary  and  determined  evil-doer  comes  under  God's  wrath  and  all  its 
consequences"  (Godet).  On  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb,  see  Rev.  W.  R. 
Nicoll's  sermon. 

and  curse — See  Answer  19.  What  has  been  said  above  may  all  be 
applied  here  also.  Wrath  is  not  rage  :  God's  curse  is  not  violent  language  or 
cruel  treatment :  the  fire  that  is  not  quenched  is  not  kindled  with  wood  or 
coals,  as  Goodwin  says,  "  It  is  a  far  subtiler  fire  than  culinary  or  kitchen 
fire."  "  Q.  Wherein  doth  the  curse  of  God  consist? — A.  In  divers  things  : 
first,  in  the  guilt  of  death,  temporal  and  eternal ;  secondly,  the  loss  of  the 
grace  and  favour  of  God  ;  thirdly,  guilt  and  horror  of  conscience,  despair  and 
anguish  here  ;  with,  fourthly,  eternal  damnation  hereafter"  (Owen's  Catechism}. 

Commenting  on  the  fact  that  the  last  word  of  the  Old  Testament  is  "a 
curse,"  Pusey  says  :  "  The  Jews,  who  would  be  wiser  and  tenderer  than  the 
prophet,  repeat  the  previous  verse,  because  Malachi  closes  so  awfully.  The 
Maker  of  the  heart  of  man  knew  better  the  hearts  which  He  had  made,  and 
taught  their  authors  to  end  the  books  of  Isaiah  and  Ecclesiastes  and  Malachi 
with  words  of  awe,  from  which  man's  heart  so  struggles  to  escape.  To  turn 
to  God  here,  or  everlasting  destruction  from  His  presence  hereafter,  is  the  only 
choice  open  to  thee."  Compare  Bengel's  note  on  the  ending  of  the  Sermon 
on  the  Mount  :  "  We  see,  from  the  present  example,  that  it  is  not  necessary 
for  all  sermons  to  end  in  a  consolatory  strain." 


l6o          THE   SHORTER    CATECHISM    WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

in  this  life  and  that  which  is  to  come.  "  And  cannot  be  expiated  but 
by  the  blood  of  Christ"  (Larger  Catechism).  "The  least  sin  which  we 
commit  in  deed,  or  word,  or  thought,  is  death,  without  repentance  "  (Hooker). 
"  A  consideration  of  the  future  sanctions  of  religion  is  our  only  security  of 
persevering  in  our  duty  in  cases  of  great  temptation  "  (Butler).  "  Wrath  and 
threatening  are  invariably  mingled  with  the  love  of  God ;  and  in  the  utmost 
solitudes  of  nature,  the  existence  of  hell  seems  to  me  as  legibly  declared  by  a 
thousand  spiritual  utterances  as  that  of  heaven.  .  .  .  Gerizim  and  Ebal,  birth 
and  death,  light  and  darkness,  heaven  and  hell,  divide  the  existence  of  man, 
and  his  futurity"  (Ruskin,  Stones  of  Venice,  iii.  3). 

USES.  —  I.    "Justice  reigns  in  hell,    and  grace  in  heaven.     Men's  merit 
makes  hell,  and  Christ's  merit  makes  heaven  (Rom.  vi.  23)"  (Traill). 

2.  "My  Lord  Cardinal,"  said  Anne  of  Austria  to  Richelieu,   "God  does 
not  pay  at  the  end  of  every  week,  but  at  last  He  pays" 

3.  "  No  sin  which  is  persisted  in  is  small,  no  sin  great  for  which  forgiveness 
is  sought  of  God  "  (Arab  proverb). 

4.  Q.   What  is  the  fourth  instruction  here  ? — A.  It  teacheth  us  what  an 
invaluable  mercy  the  full,  free,  and  fatal  remission  of  sin  is  (Ps.  xxxii. 
I,  2)  (Flavel). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Explain  the  foreign  term  solidarity  as   applied  to  the  Diuine  Law,  and  support 
the  doctrine  from  Scripture. 

2.  Commit  these  lines  of  Bunyan,  of  which  Froude  asks,   Who  that  has  read  them 
can  ever  forget  them  ? 

Sin  is  the  worm  of  hell,  tlie  lasting  fire  : 
Hell  soon  would  lose  its  heat  should  sin  expire ; 
Better  sinless  in  hell  than  to  be  where 
Heaven  is,  and  found  a  sinner  there. 


Q.  85.  What  doth  God  require  of  us,  that  we  may  escape  hh 
wrath  and  curse  due  to  us  for  si/i  ? 

A.  To  escape  the  wrath  and  curse  of  God  due  to  us  for  sin, 
God  requireth  of  us  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  repentance  unto  life,n 
with  the  diligent  use  of  all  the  outward  means  whereby  Christ 
communicateth  to  us  the  benefits  of  redemption.0 

n  Acts  xx.  21 :  Testifying  both  to  the  Jews,  and  also  to  the  Greeks,  repentance 
toward  God,  and  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

o  Prov.  ii.  1-5,  viii.  33-36.  Isa.  Iv.  3 :  Incline  your  ear,  and  come  unto  me : 
hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live  ;  and  I  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  you, 
even  the  sure  mercies  of  David. 

A  new  section  of  the  Catechism  commences  with  this  Question.  The  last 
Answer  has  stopped  every  mouth,  and  made  all  the  world  guilty  before 
God,  much  as  the  iQth  Answer  had  shut  up  the  human  race  to  "God's 
wrath  and  curse."  And  just  as  Answer  20  immediately  began  to  introduce 
the  covenant  of  grace,  and  made  mention  of  a  Redeemer,  so  here  Answer  85 
sets  before  the  individual  sinner  what  God  now  requires  of  him  that  he  may 
escape  the  wrath  and  curse  due  to  him  for  sin.  And  it  is  here  pointed  out 
that  God  requires  of  us  three  things  :  first,  faith  in  Jesus  Christ;  second. 


FAITH    IN   JESUS    CHRIST.  l6l 

repentance  unto  life  ;  and  third,  the  diligent  use  'of  all  the  outward  means 
•whereby  Christ  communicatetk  to  us  the  benefits  of  redemption.  Faith  and 
repentance  are  then  described  in  Answers  86,  87,  and  in  88  the  "outward 
means  "  are  resolved  into  the  word,  sacraments,  and  prayer,  which  again  are 
successively  treated  of,  after  which  the  Catechism  closes. 

God  requireth  of  us  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  etc. — "And,  indeed,  that  I 
may  speak  more  plainly,  what  is  faith,  and  love,  and  repentance,  and  all 
these  to  salvation  ?  They  are  salvation  itself,  they  are  parts  of  it.  When 
God  requires  of  you  that  you  should  believe,  and  repent,  and  mortify  sin,  and 
walk  holily,  doth  He  require  these  as  conditions  ?  No,  He  requires  them  as 
parts  of  salvation  itself,  as  essentials  to  salvation.  When  God  bids  us  believe, 
what  is  it  ?  It  is  to  bid  us  be  saved,  it  is  to  bid  us  have  eternal  life,  and  the 
comforts  of  eternal  life  in  our  hearts  "  (Goodwin). 

Q.  86.   What  is  faith  in  Jesus  Christ '? 

A.  Faith  in  Jesus  Christ  is  a  saving  grace,p  whereby  we 
receive  and  rest  upon  him  alone  for  salvation,  as  he  is  offered  to 
us  in  the  gospel.q 

P  Heb.  x.  39  :  But  we  are  ...  of  them  that  believe  to  the  saving  of  the  soul. 

i  John  i.  12  :  But  as  many  as  received  him,  to  them  gave  he  power  to  become 
the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  his  name.  Isa.  xxvi.  3  :  Thou  wilt 
keep  him  in  perfect  peace,  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  thee  ;  because  he  trusteth  in 
thee.  Ver.  4:  Trust  ye  in  the  Lord  for  ever:  for  in  the  Lord  JEHOVAH  is 
everlasting  strength.  Phil.  iii.  9 :  And  be  found  in  him,  not  having  mine  own 
righteousness,  which  is  of  the  law,  but  that  which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ, 
the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith.  Gal.  ii.  16  :  Knowing  that  a  man  is 
not  justified  by  the  works  of  the  law,  but  by  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  even  we 
have  believed  in  Jesus  Christ,  that  we  might  be  justified  by  the  faith  of  Christ. 

Faith  in  Jesus  Christ — "Faith,  belief,  Lat.  with  English  suffix  -th. 
The  suffix  was  added  after  the  adoption  of  the  word,  in  order  to  make  it 
analogous  with  truth,  ruth,  wealth,  health,  and  other  similar  words.  Earlier 
from  fey.  Lat.  fides t  faith,  trust  "  (Skeat). 

Faith  in  its  first  and  most  elementary  sense  is  simply  the  reliance  that  is 
placed  by  one  man  on  the  truthfulness  and  integrity  of  another.  Nor  is  this 
foundation  and  initial  sense  of  the  word  unknown  in  the  Holy  Scriptures. 
And  thus  it  is  that  Luther,  who  would  be  the  last  man  to  secularize  or  im 
poverish  any  Pauline  or  Scriptural  word,  says  :  "  The  apostle  sometimes  useth 
faith  of  the  fidelity  and  humanity  of  one  man  towards  another.  Faith  some 
times  in  the  Scriptures  means  the  credit  one  man  giveth  to  another  in  things 
pertaining  to  this  present  life  ;  for  what  manner  of  life  should  we  live  in  this 
world,  if  one  man  should  not  credit  another  ?  "  But*it  is  with  the  highest, 
most  sacred,  and  most  fruitful  sense  of  the  word  we  have  here  to  do.  And  a 
better  definition  of  faith,  in  its  scriptural,  Pauline,  and  evangelical  sense,  is 
nowhere  to  be  found  than  in  the  fourteenth  chapter  of  the  Westminster 
Confession  of  Faith.  In  the  second  section  of  that  chapter  we  read  :  "  By 
saving  faith  a  Christian  believeth  to  be  true  whatsoever  is  revealed  in  the  word 
of  God  ;  for  the  authority  of  God  Himself  speaking  therein  ;  and  it  acteth 
differently  upon  that  which  each  particular  passage  thereof  containeth  :  yielding 
obedience  to  the  commands;  trembling  at  the  threatenings;  and  embracing  the 

L 


1 62          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

promises  of  God  for  this  life  and  that  which  is  to  come.  But  the  principal 
acts  of  saving  faith  are  accepting,  receiving,  and  resting  upon  Christ  alone  for 
justification,  sanctification,  and  eternal  life,  by  virtue  of  the  covenant  of 
grace. "  Now  it  is  with  one  of  the  principal  acts  of  saving  faith,  if  not  with 
its  very  principal  act,  that  we  have  here  to  do. 

"  The  import  of  the  wordfatt/i  is  nothing  recondite  ;  otherwise  it  would  be 
a  term  altogether  unsuitable  for  being  used  in  an  exhibition  of  the  duty  of 
universal  man,  uncultured  as  well  as  cultured.  Faith  is  such  a  persuasion  or 
conviction  of  the  mind  in  reference  to  things  unseen,  and,  so  far  as  direct 
intuition  is  concerned,  unknown,  as  supplies  the  place  of  vision.  Its  moral 
power,  in  its  relation  to  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  is  resolvable  into  the 
peculiarity  of  its  object,  and  not  into  any  peculiarity  in  the  act.  .  .  .It  is 
apparently  in  virtue  of  this  mighty  moral  power  of  faith  in  Jesus  that  it  has 
been  divinely  invested  with  what  is  called  its  justifying  function  "  (Morison). 

"  So  that  they  who  know  what  is  meant  by  faith  in  a  promise,  know  what 
is  meant  \yfaith  in  the  gospel;  they  who  know  what  is  meant  \syfaith  in  a 
remedy,  know  what  is  meant  by  faith  in  the  blood  of  the  Redeemer ;  they  who 
know  what  is  meant  by  faith  in  a  physician,  faith  in  an  advocate,  faith  in  a 
friend^  know,  too,  what  the  Scriptures  mean  to  express  when  they  speak  of 
faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  (O'Brien). 

a  saving  grace — Grace  as  it  is  used  and  described  in  Answers  33,  34,  35, 
is  a  divine  disposition  toward  us ;  grace  in  this  and  the  following  Answer  is 
a  divine  gift  in  us,  and  especially  a  disposition  or  inclination  wrought  in  the 
soul  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Thus  the  fruits  or  graces  of  the  Spirit  are  love, 
long-suffering,  gentleness,  meekness,  temperance,  and  such  like.  Now  faith 
is  such  a  divine  gift  or  disposition,  that  when  it  turns  to  and  rests  on  Jesus 
Christ  it  saves  the  soul  ;  that  is  to  say,  He  saves  the  soul  which  inclines  to 
Him,  receives  Him,  cleaves  to  Him,  and  reposes  on  Him. 

receive  and  rest  upon  him— We  receive  what  is  offered 'us  ;  we  rest  on  one 
who  is  able  and  willing  to  help  us.  Now  the  text  says  that  Christ  is  offered 
to  us  in  the  gospel,  and  consequently  to  believe  the  gospel  and  to  accept 
Christ  are  one  and  the  same  thing.  Receiving  needs  no  explanation  j  and 
when  God  offers  Christ  to  the  sinner  who  has  faith  wrought  in  his  heart  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  the  sinner  opens  his  heart  and  receives  Christ  for  salvation. 
"I  believe  that  the  root  of  almost  every  schism  and  heresy  from  which  the 
Christian  Church  has  ever  suffered,  has  been  the  effort  of  man  to  earn,  rather 
than  to  receive  his  salvation  ;  and  that  the  reason  that  preaching  is  commonly 
so  ineffectual  is,  that  it  calls  on  men  oftener  to  work  for  God,  than  to  behold 
God  working  for  them  "  (Ruskin).  (See  Calvin's  definition  of  faith  criticised 
by  Dr.  Cunningham  in  his  Reformers,  p.  119.) 

alone  for  salvation— See  on  Question  33.  Every  one  has  heard  of  that 
watchword  of  the  Reformers,  sola  fide,  by  faith  alone.  And  that  doctrine  was 
not  more  the  doctrine  of  Luther  and  Knox  in  the  sixteenth  century,  than  it  was 
the  doctrine  of  Paul  and  John  in  the  first  century.  This  doctrine,  namely, 
that  forgiveness  of  sins  and  eternal  life  have  been  purchased  for  us  by  Jesus 
Christ,  and  that  faith  in  Christ,  and  faith  alone,  "putteth  on  Christ  to  justi 
fication."  And  this  is  still  the  peculiar  and  characteristic  message  of  the 
evangelical  pulpit,  the  all-sufficiency  and  aloneness  of  Christ's  obedience  and 
death  for  the  taking  away  of  sin,  and  the  corresponding  aloneness  of  faith  in 


SAVING   FAITH.  163 

the  matter  of  justification.  Dr.  Donne,  a  standard  divine  of  the  Church  of 
England,  and  originally  a  convert  from  Romanism,  thus  states  the  Calvinistic 
and  evangelical  doctrine  on  this  point:  " Deus  solus  jiistificat,  God  only 
justifies  us  ;  effici enter,  nothing  can  work  towards  it  but  only  the  mere  good 
ness  of  God.  But  it  is  also  truly  said  of  Christ,  Chris  (us  solus  justificat, 
Christ  only  justifies  us  ;  mater ialiter,  nothing  enters  into  the  body  and 
substance  of  the  ransom  of  our  sins  but  the  obedience  of  Christ.  It  is  also 
truly  said,  sola  fides  justificat,  only  faith  justifies  us;  instrumentaliter,  nothing 
apprehends,  nothing  applies  the  merit  of  Christ  to  thee,  but  thy  faith.  And 
lastly,  it  is  as  truly  said,  sola  opera  jiistificant^  only  our  works  justify  us  ; 
(tcclaratorie,  only  thy  good  life  can  assure  thy  conscience  and  the  world  that 
thou  art  justified."  "And  I,  my  loving  Brentius,"  writes  Luther,  "do  use 
to  think  as  if  in  my  heart  were  no  quality  or  virtue  at  all  which  is  called 
faith  or  love,  but  I  set  all  on  Christ,  and  say,  my  formalis  justitia,  that  is, 
my  sure,  my  constant  and  complete  righteousness,  in  which  there  is  no  want 
or  failing,  is  Christ  my  Lord  and  Saviour." 

as  he  is  Offered  to  us  in  the  gospel.  "  Freely  offered  to  us  in  the  gospel  " 
(Answer  31).  Now  when  any  offer  is  made  to  us,  by  the  mere  fact  of  that 
offer  we  are  placed  in  a  new,  and  peculiar,  and  responsible  position.  We  are 
not  after  the  offer  just  as  we  were  before  it.  The  offerer  has  put  a  constraint, 
and  an  obligation,  and  a  responsibility  upon  us.  For  we  must  either  accept 
the  offer  or  refuse  it.  And,  indeed,  not  to  accept  is  to  refuse.  Not  to  say 
we  refuse  and  yet  not  to  accept,  is  to  do  worse  than  refuse,  it  is  to  despise. 
Prov.  i.  29-33.  "I  have  despised  His  Person,  I  have  despised  His  righteous 
ness,  I  have  counted  His  blood  an  unholy  thing,  I  have  done  despite  to  His 
spirit  of  grace  :  therefore  I  have  shut  myself  out  of  all  His  promises  ;  and 
there  now  remains  to  me  nothing  but  threatenings,  dreadful  threatenings, 
faithful  threatenings  of  certain  judgment,  which  shall  devour  me  as  an 
adversary  "  (The  Man  in  the  Iron  Cage}. 

"  There  is  all  reason  to  suppose  that  God  deals  with  particular  believers  as 
He  dealt  with  His  Church,  which  he  first  made  to  hear  His  voice  in  the  law, 
with  terrible  thunders  and  lightnings,  and  kept  her  under  a  schoolmaster  to 
lead  her  to  Christ ;  and  then  comforted  her  with  the  joyful  sound  of  the  gospel 
from  Mount  Zion.  And  it  seems  to  be  the  natural  import  of  the  word  gospel, 
glad  tidings,  that  it  is  news  of  a  deliverance  and  salvation  after  great  fear  and 
distress"  (Edwards). 

USES.— i.  "Truly,  I  am  persuaded,  if  it  were  possible  all  men  could  agree 
in  what  signification  those  three  words,  faith,  grace,  and  spirit,  were 
to  be  understood  in  each  place  where  any  of  them  are  found,  three  full 
parts,  at  least,  of  four  of  those  unhappy  controversies  that  have  been  held 
up  in  the  Christian  Church  would  vanish"  (Sanderson). 

2.  The  Confession  says  that  faith  acteth  differently  upon  that  which  each 
particular  passage  in  Scripture  containeth.  And  so  it  is  with  faith  in 
Christ.  Faith  acts  differently  on  the  Lord  Jesus,  according  as  He  is 
set  forth  in  the  gospel  before  the  believing  soul.  Faith  answers  to  all 
Christ's  fulness.  There  is  nothing  in  God,  as  He  is  the  God  of  all  grace  ; 
there  is  nothing  in  Christ  as  containing  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily, 
nothing  that  faith  is  not  fitted  and  intended  to  appropriate.  As  a 
believer  contemplates  and  considers  Christ  in  His  one  Person,  in  His 
two  Natures,  and  in  His  three  Offices,  he  receives  Him  in  all,  and  still 


164          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

says,  as  he  sees  so  much  he  cannot  appropriate,   Lord,   increase  my 
faith  ! 

3.  "  Why  did  lie  choose  failh  of  all  graces  to  save  a  man  by?     Because 
the  poorest  in  the  world,  the  weakest  understanding,  can  believe  and 
trust.     When  he  heareth  that  God  will  save  sinners,  he  is  able  to  trust 
God,  as  strongly  and  as  firmly  as  the  wisest  understanding  man  in  the 
world.     Nay,  your  weak  men,  they  are  aptest  to  believe,  they  are  more 
suited  for  faith  "  (Goodwin). 

4.  Bellarmin,  the  great  Romish  controversialist,  after  all  his  disputes  about 
works  and  relying  on  saints  and  angels,  says,  "  After  all,  it  is  safest  to 
place  our  trust  in  the  mercy  of  God  alone." 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  On  the  elementary  and  first  sense  of  Faith  consult  Heb.  xi. ;  Dante's  Paradise, 
xxiu. ;  Luther's  Galatians,  v.  22;  also  Cruden's  excellent  table  under  Faith. 

>  2.  Explain  Goodwin's  four  phrases:  Faith,  my  brethren,  is  a  passion,  uiii.  467; 
faith  answers  to  the  whole  of  Christ,  //'.  411 ;  faith  is  the  most  modest  of  all 
graces,  //'.  327;  of  all  works,  faith  is  the  easiest  and  hardest,  /.  449. 

•  3.  Explain  Luther's  paradox :  Cavendum  est  a  peccatis.  Sed  multo  magis  at) 
operibus  bonis  :  a  man  must  tahe  heed  of  his  sins,  but  much  more  of  his  good  works. 

4.  Consult  Christian's  answer  to  Ignorance's  confession  of  his  faith. 

5.  Philippi,  a  German  commentator,  says :  Sola  fide  was  the  Reformation  Shibbo 
leth.    And  Sir  James  Stephen,  in  his  essay  on  Martin  Luther,  says :  The  Labarum  of 
Luther  was  a  banner  inscribed  with  the  legend,  Justification  by  faith.    This  was 
the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  his  distinctive  creed.    Explain  the  allusions. 

6.  Explain   and    support  Bengel's   saying :    Infidelitas    proprie   damnat,   unbelief 
exclusively  damns. 


Q.  87.    What  is  repentance  unto  life  ? 

A.  Repentance  unto  life  is  a  saving  grace,r  whereby  a  sinner, 
out  of  a  true  sense  of  his  sin,8  and  apprehension  of  the  mercy  of 
God  in  Christ,*  doth,  with  grief  and  hatred  of  his  sin,  turn  from 
it  unto  God,u  with  full  purpose  of,  and  endeavour  after,  new 
obedience/ 

r  Acts  xi.  18  :  Then  hath  God  also  to  the  Gentiles  granted  repentance  unto  life. 

8  Acts  ii.  37  :  Now  when  they  heard  this,  they  were  pricked  in  their  heart,  and 
said  unto  Peter,  and  to  the  rest  of  the  apostles,  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we 
do?  Ver.  38  :  Then  Peter  said  unto  them,  Repent,  and  be  baptized  every  one  of 
you  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  ye  shall  receive  the 
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

4  Joel  ii.  12  :  Therefore  also  now,  saith  the  Lord,  Turn  ye  even  to  me  with  all 
your  heart,  and  with  fasting,  and  with  weeping,  and  with  mourning.  Jer.  iii.  22  : 
Return,  ye  backsliding  children,  and  I  will  heal  your  backslidings.  Behold,  we 
come  unto  thee  ;  for  thou  art  the  Lord  our  God. 

ujer.  xxxi.  18,  19.  Ezek.  xxxvi.  31  :  Then  shall  ye  remember  your  own  evil 
ways,  and  your  doings  that  were  not  good,  and  shall  loathe  yourselves  in  your 
own  sight,  for  your  iniquities,  and  for  your  abominations. 

v  2  Cor.  vii.  ii  :  For,  behold,  this  selfsame  thing,  that  ye  sorrowed  after  a 
godly  sort,  what  carefulness  it  wrought  in  you,  yea,  what  clearing  of  yourselves, 


REPENTANCE   UNTO   LIFE.  165 

yea,  what  indignation,  yea,  what  fear,  yea,  what  vehement  desire,  yea,  what  zeal, 
yea,  what  revenge  !  In  all  things  ye  have  approved  yourselves  to  be  clear  in  this 
matter.  Isa.  i.  16  :  Wash  you,  make  you  clean  ;  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings 
from  before  mine  eyes  ;  cease  to  do  evil ;  Ver.  17 :  Learn  to  do  well ;  seek 
judgment ;  relieve  the  oppressed  ;  judge  the  fatherless  ;  plead  for  the  widow. 

Repentance — This  word  originally  meant  merely  an  afterthought^  a  second 
thought.  Before  it  had  any  moral  or  religious  sense  attached  to  it,  the  word 
signified  the  sight  we  get  of  an  action  when  we  look  at  it  after  it  is  past.  But 
words  grow,  and  they  grow  with  the  growth  of  the  mind  that  uses  them  ; 
sometimes  they  grow  better,  and  sometimes  they  grow  worse  :  they  are  like 
the  dyer's  hand,  their  nature  is  subdued  to  what  they  work  in.  And  thus  it 
is  that  with  us  the  pure  intellectual  act  of  memory  becomes  entangled, 
embarrassed,  and  burdened  with  the  past  it  is  continually  revisiting.  So  full 
is  our  past  of  matter  that  causes  regret  and  remorse,  shame  and  sorrow,  that 
memory  in  us  has  almost  lost  its  pure  and  natural  operation,  and  become 
transformed  into  an  evil  conscience.  >The  return  of  a  man's  mind  upon  his 
past  is  almost  equivalent  to  a  condemnation  of  his  past.  And  thus  here,  as 
so  often  elsewhere,  the  grammarian,  before  he  is  aware,  is  already  within  the 
sphere  of  the  moralist,  and  etymology  has,  all  unwittingly  to  itself,  become 
the  forerunner  of  experimental  religion.  The  study  of  words  is  often 
saddening,  and  this  is  an  example  of  it. 

unto  life — To  distinguish  repentance  from  remorse  and  despair  see  2  Cor. 
vii.  9-11.  For  repentance  unto  life  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  sorrow 
that  worketh  death.  The  name  of  remorse  is  given  to  that  relentless  gnawing 
pain  which  is  sometimes  awakened  in  a  wrong-doer's  mind.  Remorse  is  the 
piercing  recollection  of  having  done  evil  when  there  is  no  tenderness  or  con 
trition  mingled  with  the  inward  pain.  Remorse  crushes  rather  than  breaks 
the  miserable  heart.  The  pains  of  hell  take  hold  of  the  remorseful  man. 
He  is  filled  full  with  self-contempt,  "bitterer  to  drink  than  blood."  Saul 
and  Judas  are  notorious  examples  of  remorse,  of  sorrow  that  worketh  death. 
But  repentance  unto  life,  on  the  other  hand,  is  full  of  a  melting,  humble, 
pliable,  patient,  and  affectionate  spirit.  The  tears  of  repentance  are  not 
bitter ;  they  do  not  burn  where  they  fall ;  they  are  sweetened  by  meekness, 
and  humility,  and  love.  Repentance  has  sometimes  sorrow  even  to  anguish, 
but  it  has  no  bitterness,  or  cruelty,  or  impatience  mingled  with  its  anguish. 
Remorse  rushes  on  death,  but  true  repentance  has  no  desire  to  die,  unless 
indeed  it  be  to  die  for  others.  Repentance  is  unto  life, 

a  saving  grace— See  under  Question  86.  Calvin,  remarking  on  John's 
preaching,  says  that  repentance  is  not  placed  first,  as  some  ignorantly  suppose, 
as  if  it  were  the  ground  of  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  or  as  if  it  induced  God  to 
begin  to  be  gracious  to  us  ;  but  men  are  commanded  to  repent  that  they  may 
receive  the  reconciliation  that  is  offered  to  them.  .  .  .  Though  John,  when 
he  introduces  the  mention  of  the  grace  of  God,  exhorts  men  to  repentance, 
yet  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  repentance,  not  less  than  the  inheritance  of 
the  heavenly  kingdom,  is  the  gift  of  God.  It  is  a  remark  of  Bengel's  that 
repentance  is  a  joyful  gift,  and  not  a  matter  of  sorrow.  And  he  refers  to 
Acts  v.  31,  xi.  18;  2  Tim.  ii.  25. 

a  true  sense  of  sin— See  Answers  14,  31,  84.  A  true  sense  of  sin  is  to 
see  it  and  feel  it  as  committed  against  God,  and  against  God  as  He  is  revealed 
in  the  Scriptures  and  in  Jesus  Christ.  A  true  sense  of  sin  is  felt  when  a  peni- 


1 66         THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

tent,  keeping  ever  before  him  the  injuries  he  has  done  to  himself  and  to  his 
neighbour,  and  doing  all  that  in  him  lies  to  make  reparation  for  these,  yet 
cries  continually,  "Against  Thee,  Thee  only,  have  I  sinned."  A  true  sense 
of  sin  is  to  see  its  sinfulness,  and  its  aggravations.  All  the  experimental 
scriptures  are  full  of  a  true  sense  of  sin,  and  no  other  writing  in  the  world  is, 
unless  such  writings  as  draw  their  spiritual  insight  and  sensitiveness  from 
Scripture.  And  of  all  the  Scriptures  the  fifty-first  Psalm  is  perhaps  the  best, 
as  it  is  the  fullest,  expression  of  a  true  repentance  under  a  true  sense  of  sin. 
For  another  example  see  Bunyan's  Grace  Abounding. 

apprehension  of  the  inercy  of  God  in  Christ — To  apprehend  means 
originally  to  lay  hold  of  by  the  hand.  In  the  text  the  word  takes  the  secondary 
sense  of  taking  hold  of  with  the  understanding.  To  apprehend  the  mercy  of 
God  is  to  receive  the  assurance  of  it  into  the  mind,  and  to  hold  by  it  (Phil. 
iii.  12). 

"Ah,  but  a  man's  reach  should  exceed  his  grasp, 
Or  what's  a  heaven  for  ? " — BROWNING. 

The  mercy  of  God  is  His  feeling  of  pity  toward  our  misery.  "Mercy 
(inisericordia)  hath  but  its  name  from  misery,  and  is  no  other  thing  than 
laying  another's  misery  to  heart. "  In  Christ,  because  He  was  the  Person, 
and  His  was  the  work  in  which  God's  mercy  to  sinners  was  and  is  revealed 
and  offered.  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  sinners  to  Himself. 

grief  and  hatred  of  his  sin— Grief,  grams,  heavy.  "He  began  to  be 
sorrowful  and  very  heavy"  Hatred,  extreme  dislike,  detestation.  Wedgwood 
derives  this  word  from  an  old  root,  has  or  hat,  used  in  setting  on  a  clog  to 
attack  a  person,  an  act  of  hostility,  contest,  hate.  And  he  points  out  that 
the  connection  between  the  idea  of  setting  on  animals  to  fight  and  the  angry 
passions  is  also  seen  in  Gael,  stttig,  to  incite,  spur  on,  set  dogs  to  fight  (Lat. 
instigare))  and  Greek  stugos,  hatred.  "Without  hatred  of  sin,  and  remorse 
for  transgressions,  no  man  will  taste  the  grace  of  God  "  (Calvin).  "Penitents 
have  felt  that  they  deserve  no  more  that  the  sun  should  shine  upon  them, 
or  the  earth  sustain  them,  or  the  air  support  them,  or  wine  refresh  them,  or 
food  nourish  them,  since  all  these  are  the  creatures  and  the  servants  of  the 
God  whom  themselves  have  offended  "  (Pusey). 

"  But  we  have  known  that  there  is  often  found 
In  mournful  thoughts,  and  always  might  be  found, 
A  power  to  virtue  friendly." 

—WORDSWORTH'S  Margaret. 

turn  from  it  unto  God — Conversion,  in  the  scriptural  and  religious  sense 
of  that  word,  is  just  turning  from  sin  unto  God.  Matthew  Henry  says  it  is 
not  sinning  that  ruins  men,  but  sinning  and  not  repenting. 

"  Heed  this,  O  man,  ere  grace  be  spent ; 

To  fall  from  God  and  scorn  to  rise, 
To  sink  in  woes  and  ne'er  repent, 

This  makes  the  death  that  never  dies." 

—BRIGHT. 

full  purpose  of,  and  endeavour  after,  new  obedience.  "Pharnaces  sent 
a  crown  to  Caesar  at  the  same  time  that  he  rebelled  against  him ;  but 
Caesar  returned  the  crown,  and  sent  this  message  back,  Let  him  return  to 
his  obedience  first"  (Plutarch).  "  Chr.  And  did  you  endeavour  to  mend? 
Hope.  Yes ;  and  fled  not  only  from  my  sins,  but  sinful  company  too ;  and 


REPENTANCE   UNTO    LIFE.  167 

betook  me  to  religious  duties,  as  prayer,  reading,  weeping  for  sin,  speaking 
truth  to  my  neighbours,  etc.  These  things  did  I,  with  many  others,  too 
much  here  to  relate."  All  obedience  is  not  "new  obedience."  For  there 
may  be  reformation  when  there  is  not  repentance  unto  life  and  its  new  fruits. 
Outward  reformation  is  not  evangelical  repentance.  Reformation  of  life  and 
habits  need  not  extend  to,  and  as  a  matter  of  fact  and  experience  it  often  does 
not  extend  to,  true  repentance.  Before  the  reformed  man  can  take  rank  with 
the  penitent,  he  must  first  feel  both  grief  and  hatred  of  his  sin ;  the  more 
other  men  forgive  him,  and  forget  his  past,  the  more  keenly  and  bitterly  must 
he  remember  it.  Instead  of  excusing  and  condoning  and  foi'getting  his  sin, 
he  must  take  up  the  language  of  the  Psalmist  continually,  "He  hath  not 
dealt  with  us  after  our  sins,  nor  rewarded  us  according  to  our  iniquity." 
Ezra  is  the  scriptural  type  of  a  true  penitent.  "After  all  that  is  come 
upon  us  for  our  evil  deeds,  and  for  our  great  trespass,  Thou  our  God  hast 
punished  us  less  than  our  iniquities  deserve."  It  is  the  reformation  and 
amendment  that  spring  from  a  soil  and  a  root  like  this  that  is  denominated 
new  obedience  in" the  text.  "  A  really  obedient  mind  is  necessarily  dissatisfied 
with  itself,  and  looks  out  of  itself  for  help,  from  understanding  the  greatness 
of  its  task ;  in  other  words,  in  proportion  as  a  man  obeys  is  he  driven  to 
faith,  in  order  to  learn  the  remedy  of  the  imperfections  of  his  obedience  " 
(Newman). 

USES. — i.  In  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  the  Confession  of  Faith,  which  treats 
of  Repentance  unto  Life,  we  read  :  "Men ought  not  to  content  themselves 
with  a  general  repentance ;  but  it  is  every  man's  duty  to  endeavour  to 
repent  of  his  particular  sins  particularly."  And  Hooker  and  Taylor, 
standard  divines  in  a  somewhat  different  ecclesiastical  school,  agree  with 
the  Confession  in  this.  For  Hooker  says  :  "  A  general  persuasion  that 
thou  art  a  sinner  will  neither  so  humble  and  bridle  thy  soul  as  if  the 
catalogue  of  thy  sins  examined  severally  be  kept  continually  in  mind." 
And  Jeremy  Taylor,  in  his  Unum  Necessarium^  says :  "  Every  single 
act  of  vice  may  and  must  be  repented  of  particularly,  if  it  be  a  wilful, 
deliberate,  and  observed  action.  A  general  repentance  will  not  serve 
thy  turn  in  those  cases."  "I  was  a  blasphemer,"  particularizes  the 
apostle,  "and  a  persecutor,  and  injurious."  Let  no  man,  then,  who 
would  truly  repent  of  his  sins  content  and  deceive  himself  with  the  easy 
and  unprofitable  impeachment,  I  am  a  sinner.  Let  no  man  suppose  that 
he  has  perfected  his  repentance  before  God  by  uttering  the  penitential 
words,  "  Pardon  mine  iniquity,  for  it  is  great."  But  let  him  with  a  noble 
self-accusation  take  hold  of  his  sins,  and  lead  them  out  of  the  darkness, 
and  tell  out  before  God  and  his  own  conscience  their  particulars  and 
their  aggravations.  Let  him  be  beforehand  with  the  great  day.  Let 
him  relieve  the  Judge  of  His  strange  work. 

2.  It  is  only  an  extension  of  the  same  great  principle  of  true  repentance  to 
apply  it  to  particular  persons  with  whom  we  have  had  to  do,  and  against 
whom  we  have  sinned.     On  this  point  the  Confession  takes  up  this 
position  :  "  As  every  man  is  bound  to  make  private  confession  of  his  sins 
to  God,  ...  so  he  that  scandalizeth  his  brother,  or  the  Church  of  Christ, 
ought  to  be  willing,  by  a  private  or  public  confession  of  his  sin,  to 
declare  his  repentance  to  those  that  are  offended  ;  who  are  thereupon  to 
be  reconciled  to  him,  and  in  love  to  receive  him." 

3.  But  we  must  not  only  repent  continually  of  what  we  have  done,  we  must 


1 68          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

still  more  repent  of  what  we  are.  The  most  perfect  penitents  aim  at 
this,  and  in  measure  attain  to  it.  It  is  not  so  much  for  the  sins  that  have 
come  out  of  their  hearts  that  they  are  humbled,  as  for  the  bottomless 
sinfulness  out  of  which  the  sins  sprang. 

4.  "  No  true  penitent  forgets  or  forgives  himself;    an   unforgiving    spirit 
toward  himself  is  the  very  price  of  God's  forgiving  him.     Still  let  this 
comfort  and  encourage  all  penitents ;  they  may  be  high,  they  may  be 
highest,  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  they  may  be,  like  St.  Paul,  not  a 
whit  behind  the  chiefest "  (Newman). 

5.  "But  we  profess  that  as  ravishing  joy  is  not  necessary  and  essential  to 
faith,  so  nor  deep  vexing  gashes  and  impressions  of  wrath  are  necessary 
to  humiliation,  though  they  often  accompany  it ;  -as  the  one  is  the  over 
flow  of  faith,  and  the  other  of  humiliation  "  (Goodwin). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Can  you  explain  why  the   Westminster   Divines   have    placed    repentance    after 
faith,  justification,  adoption,  and   sanctification   in    the    order  of  the  evangelical 
graces  ?     See  the  Confession    and   the   Larger  Catechism.      Reconcile   their  method 
with  Mark  i.   75  and  Acts  xx.  21.     Explain    their   meaning  when  they  call  repent 
ance  unto  life  a  seed  (Larger  Catechism,   Answer  75). 

2.  Connect   Question    87  with    Questions   14,   31,   84 ;    and  explain    and  illustrate 
the    Augustinian,    Calvinistic,    and   Puritan    thesis  :    There    is    more    guilt   in  the 
sinfulness  of  our  nature  than  in  all  our  actual  transgressions  together. 

3.  Explain  and  illustrate  from  Scripture  Mpzley's  words,  Essays,  /.   32:  With  [tho 
growth  in  goodness  grows  the  sense  of  sin. 

4.  Do   you  accept,  and   can   you   explain   and   vindicate   the  teaching  of  our  best 
Protestant  and  Puritan  divines  concerning  our  personal  and  evangelical  repentance 
for  Adam's  sin  ? 

5.  Remark  on  verses  8  and  9  of  Manasseh's   Apocryphal  prayer :   Surely  Thou,  O 
God,    the   God   of   the   just,  hast   not   appointed    repentance   for  the   just,  for 
Abraham,  and    Isaac,    and   Jacob,  who    have    not    sinned    against  Thee.      But 
Thou  hast  appointed  repentance  for  me,  who  am  a  sinner.     For  I  have  sinned 
above  the  number  of  the  sand  of  the  sea. 

6.  Criticise   and   correct   Dr.    Johnson's   statement   of  his    faith :   Repentance   is 
suppletory  to  obedience  (Bos well,  chap.  Ixiv.).     On  this   utterance   of   "Our  great 
Moralist "  young  divines  should  read  note  J.  in  O'Brien's  fine  word,  The  Nature  and 
Effects  of  Faith.     That  in  such  a  writer  such  deviations  are  a  matter  of  grave 
culpability,  see  John  Foster's  Aversion  of  Men  of  Taste  to  Evangelical  Religion, 
Letter  ix, 

7.  Explain  Joseph  Hall's  words,  commenting  on  2  Chron.  xxxiii.  15  :  True  repentance 
begins  to  decline  at  the  ablative. 


Q.  88.  What  are  the  outward  means  whereby  Christ  com- 
municateth  to  us  the  benefits  of  redemption  ? 

A.  The  outward  and  ordinary  means  whereby  Christ  com- 
municateth  to  us  the  benefits  of  redemption,  are  his  ordinances, 
especially  the  word,  sacraments,  and  prayer ;  all  which  are  made 
effectual  to  the  elect  for  salvation.w 

w  Matt,  xxviii.  19 :  Go  ye  therefore,  and  teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in 
the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  Ver.  30  :  Teach- 


THE   MEANS   OF   GRACE.  169 

ing  them  to  observe  all  things  whatsoever  I  have  commanded  you  :  and,  lo,  I  am 
with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world.  Amen.  Acts  ii.  42  :  And  they 
continued  stedfastly  in  the  apostles'  doctrine  and  fellowship,  and  in  breaking  of 
bread,  and  in  prayers.  Ver.  46  :  And  they,  continuing  daily  with  one  accord  in 
the  temple,  and  breaking  bread  from  house  to  house,  did  eat  their  meat  with  glad 
ness  and  singleness  of  heart,  Ver.  47  :  Praising  God,  and  having  favour  with  all 
the  people.  And  the  Lord  added  to  the  church  daily  such  as  should  be  saved. 

The  outward  and  ordinary  means— See  Answer  85.  The  inward  means 
whereby  Christ  communicateth  to  us  the  benefits  of  redemption,  faith  and 
repentance,  having  already  been  discussed,  we  come  now  to  the  outward 
means,  and  they  are  here  enumerated  as  the  word,  sacraments,  and  prayer. 
And  what  remains  of  the  Catechism  is  taken  up  with  {the  successive  dis 
cussion  of  these  three  means  of  grace  and  salvation.  "  By  means  of  grace 
are  not  meant  every  instrumentality  which  God  may  please  to  make  the 
means  of  spiritual  edification  to  His  children.  The  phrase  is  intended  to 
indicate  those  institutions  which  God  has  ordained  to  be  the  ordinary  channels 
of  grace,  i.e.  of  the  supernatural  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  the  souls  of 
men.  The  means  of  grace,  according  to  the  standards  of  our  Church,  are 
the  word,  sacraments,  and  prayer.  .  .  .  The  Reformed  teach  that  the  opera 
tions  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are  absolutely  confined  neither  to  the  word  nor  to 
the  sacraments.  He  works  when  and  where  He  sees  fit ;  as  in  the  times  of 
the  Old  Testament  and  during  the  Apostolic  Age  His  extraordinary  gifts  were 
not  conveyed  through  the  medium  of  the  truth,  so  neither  now  are  the  gifts 
for  ecclesiastical  office,  nor  is  the  regeneration  of  infants,  effected  by  any  such 
instrumentality  "  (Hodge). 

QUESTION. 

Divide  the  remainder  of  the  Catechism  according  to  the  outline  supplied  in  Answer 
88. 


Q.  89.  How  is  the  word  made  effectual  to  salvation  ? 

A.  The  Spirit  of  God  maketh  the  reading,  but  especially  the 
preaching  of  the  word,  an  effectual  means  of  convincing  and 
converting  sinners,  and  of  building  them  up  in  holiness  and 
comfort,  through  faith,  unto  salvation.x 

x  Neh.  viii.  8  :  So  they  read  in  the  book,  in  the  law  of  God,  distinctly,  and  gave 
the  sense,  and  caused  them  to  understand  the  reading,  i  Cor.  xiv.  25  :  And  thus 
are  the  secrets  of  his  heart  made  manifest ;  and  so,  falling  down  on  his  face,  he 
will  worship  God,  and  report  that  God  is  in  you  of  a  truth.  Acts  xxvi.  18 :  To 
open  their  eyes,  and  to  turn  them  from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  power  of 
Satan  unto  God,  that  they  may  receive  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  inheritance  among 
them  which  are  sanctified  by  faith  that  is  in  me.  Ps.  xix.  8  :  The  statutes  of  the 
Lord  are  right,  rejoicing  the  heart :  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  is  pure, 
enlightening  the  eyes.  Acts  xx.  32  :  And  now,  brethren,  I  commend  you  to  God, 
and  to  the  word  of  his  grace,  which  is  able  to  build  you  up  and  to  give  you  an 
inheritance  among  all  them  which  are  sanctified.  Rom.  xv.  4 :  For  whatsoever 
things  were  written  aforetime  were  written  for  our  learning  ;  that  we,  through 
patience  and  comfort  of  the  scriptures,  might  have  hope.  2  Tim.  iii.  15 :  And 


170          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A    COMMENTARY. 

that  from  a  child  thou  hast  known  the  holy  scriptures,  which  are  able  to  make 
thee  wise  unto  salvation  through  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  Ver.  16  :  All 
scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  is  profitable  for  doctrine,  for  reproof, 
for  correction,  for  instruction  in  righteousness  ;  Ver.  17  :  That  the  man  of  God 
may  be  perfect,  thoroughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works.  Rom.  x.  14  :  How 
then  shall  they  call  on  him  in  whom  they  have  not  believed  ?  and  how  shall  they 
believe  in  him  of  whom  they  have  not  heard?  and  how  shall  they  hear  without  a 
preacher  ?  Ver.  17 :  So  then  faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of 
God.  Rom.  i.  16  :  For  I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ :  for  it  is  the 
power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth  ;  to  the  Jew  first,  and  also 
to  the  Greek. 

The  Spirit  of  God  maketh  the  reading — "  God's  own  words  will  not 
obtain  full  credit  in  the  hearts  of  men,  until  they  are  sealed  by  the  inward 
testimony  of  the  Spirit.  The  same  Spirit  therefore  who  spoke  by  the 
mouth  of  the  prophets,  must  penetrate  our  hearts,  in  order  to  convince  us 
that  they  faithfully  delivered  the  message  with  which  they  were  divinely 
entrusted.  .  .  .  Let  it  therefore  be  held  as  fixed,  that  those  who  are  inwardly 
taught  by  the  Holy  Ghost  acquiesce  implicitly  in  Scripture ;  that  Scripture, 
carrying  its  own  evidence  along  with  it,  deigns  not  to  submit  to  proofs  and 
arguments,  but  owes  the  full  conviction  with  which  we  ought  to  receive  it  to 
the  testimony  of  the  Spirit "  (Calvin). 

"  But  there  is  a  thing  ye  man  ever  remember  ;  there  is  na  doctrine,  nather 
of  the  simple  word,  nor  yit  of  the  sacraments,  gif  Christ  abstract  His  Haly 
Spirit,  that  is  able  to  move.  Therefore,  quhen  ever  ye  come  to  hear  the 
doctrine,  quhider  it  be  of  the  sacraments  or  of  the  simple  word,  crave  of  God 
that  He  wald  be  present  be  His  Haly  Spirit,  or  utherwise  al  the  doctrine  in 
the  earth  will  not  availe  you"  (Robert  Bruce,  Sermons,  1589). 

but  especially  the  preaching  of  his  word — "  It  does  not  answer  the  end 
which  God  had  in  instituting  the  office  of  preaching,  merely  for  men  to  have 
good  commentaries  and  expositions  on  the  Scripture,  and  other  good  books 
of  divinity  ;  because,  though  these  may  tend,  as  well  as  preaching,  to  give 
a  good  doctrinal  or  speculative  understanding  of  the  word  of  God,  yet  they 
have  not  an  equal  tendency  to  impress  them  on  men's  hearts  and  affec 
tions"  (Jonathan  Edwards).  "The  sermon  has  tver  been  the  great 
central  feature  of  primitive  and  Protestant  worship,  and  still  serves  to  dis 
tinguish  the  evangelical  from  the  ritualistic  type  of  Christianity  ";i  (Shields' 
Liturgia  Expurgata],  "It  is  mainly  by  the  institution  of  preaching  that 
religion  is  kept  a  conspicuous  thing,  a  public  acknowledged  reality.  .  .  . 
If  we  are  told  that  we  ought  rather  to  say  that  it  is  public  worship  that 
has  this  effect,  we  have  to  answer,  that  public  worship,  separately  from 
preaching^  has  a  very  small  effect  in  favour  of  religion,  as  far  as  instruction 
is  concerned.  It  is  quite  certain  that  when  the  conductors  of  that  worship 
have  not  knowledge  and  religion  enough  to  preach,  that  worship  will  be  little 
more  than  a  ceremonial  routine  of  forms."  (See  John  Foster's  Lectures, 
Ixiv.,"  On  the  Institution  of  Preaching.") 

convincing  and  converting  sinners — See  Answer  31.  Savonarola,  in 
his  Triumph  of  the  Cross,  tells  us  that  when  he  neglected  the  preaching  of 
the  word,  and  applied  himself  to  discourses  of  philosophy,  he  gained  little 
upon  the  hearts  of  the  people ;  but  when  he  came  to  illustrate  and  explain 
the  Scriptures,  the  minds  of  the  people  were  wonderfully  inflamed  and 
excited  to  a  serious  frame ;  and  that  when  he  discoursed  in  a  philosophical 


THE  READING  AND  PREACHING  OF  THE  WORD.         171 

manner,  there  was  a  non-attention,  not  only  of  the  more  ignorant,  but  of  the 
more  learned  sort  too ;  but  when  he  preached  Scripture  truths,  he  found  the 
minds  of  men  mightily  delighted,  stung  with  divine  truth,  brought  to  com 
punction,  and  a  reformation  of  their  lives,  which  shows,  he  says,  the  power 
of  the  word,  acting  more  vigorously  than  all  human  reason  in  the  world. 

"When  the  word  of  God  came  into  Paul's  conscience,  then  he  died. 
As  some  metals  will  not  melt  till  some  other  metal  be  put  to  them,  so  nor 
will  sins  melt  or  dissolve  in  the  conscience  till  the  word  comes  as  fire  and 
mingles  with  them ;  but  when  God  sets  it  on  work,  it  runs  through  the 
soul  like  hail-shot  or  like  quicksilver.  Have  you  seen  hurricane  winds  or 
tempests  that  overthrew  towers  to  their  very  foundation,  tear  up  hills  by  the 
roots  and  cast  them  into  the  sea,  toss  up  ships  riding  at  anchor  like  tennis 
balls,  and  hurl  them  upon  the  dry  land  ?  Such  and  so  great,  though  not  so 
visible  to  the  outward  sense,  is  the  power  of  the  word.  It  tears  men's  hearts, 
rooted  in  evil,  from  their  dearest  lusts  j  it  makes  their  consciences  to  boil 
like  a  pot,  and  the  waves  thereof  to  roar,  and  with  one  word  it  stills  them, 
and  calms  the  winds  and  the  waves,  and  they  obey  it,  and  the  heart  is  paci 
fied.  .  .  .  Such  is  the  word,  and  every  portion  of  it.  Therefore  take  heed 
how  ye  hear.  Men  feel  not  this  now,  nor  do  they  imagine  what  a  design 
God  hath  upon  men  in  this  dispensation  of  hearing  and  preaching.  He  pre 
pares  and  lays  a  train  for  the  other  world  ;  yea,  and  this  instrumentality 
serves  to  all  His  designs  upon  the  ungodly  that  obey  not  His  word " 
(Goodwin). 

USES. — I.  "You  read  your  Bible  regularly,  of  course ;  but  do  try  to 
understand  it,  and  still  more  to  feel  it.  Read  more  parts  than  one  at  a 
time.  For  example,  if  you  are  reading  Genesis,  read  a  Psalm  also  ;  or 
if  you  are  reading  Matthew,  read  a  small  bit  of  an  Epistle  also.  Turn 
the  Bible  into  prayer"  (M'Cheyne's  Letter  to  a  Boy}. 

2.  Let  all  students  who  aspire  to  preach,  read  Baxter's  Reformed  Pastor ; 
rJso  Goodwin's  Memoir  by  his  son,  in  the  second  volume  of  his  Works. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Refer  bach  to  the  quotation  taken  from   Shields'   Liturgia  Expurgata,  and  say 
in  what  Christian  churches  known  to  you  does  the  Evangelical,  and  in  what 
churches  does  the  Liturgical  element  predominate. 

2.  Sir  James  Stephen  says :  The  system  called  Evangelical  is  that  system  of 
which,   if  Augustine,   Luther,   Calvin,   Knox,   and  the  writers  of  the   English 
Eomilies  may  he  credited,  Christ  Himself  was  the  Author,  and  Paul  the  first  and 
greatest  interpreter.     Describe   some  leading  features  of  the  Euangelical  system ; 
what  are  its  leading  doctrines;  and  who,  besides  those  named,  were  and  are  its  best 
known  interpreters. 

3.  Who  is  the  Agent,   what  are  His   more  and  less  special  means,  and  what  are 
His  ends,  immediate  and  ultimate,  set  forth  in  this  Answer? 

4.  Support  and  illustrate  the  statement  made  in  the  text,  that  preaching  is  a  more 
fruitful  means  of  grace  than  the  private  reading  of  God's  word. 


Q.  90.  How  is  tJie  word  to  be  read  and  heard,  that  it  may 
become  effectual  to  salvation  ? 
A.  That  the  word  may  become  effectual  to  salvation,  we  must 


172          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM    WITH    A    COMMENTARY. 

attend  thereunto  with  diligence,7  preparation,2  and  prayer  ;a 
receive  it  with  faith  and  love,b  lay  it  up  in  our  hearts,0  and 
practise  it  in  our  lives.d 

y  Prov.  viii.  34 :  Blessed  is  the  man  that  heareth  me,  watching  daily  at  my 
gates,  waiting  at  the  posts  of  my  doors. 

z  i  Pet.  ii.  i  :  Wherefore,  laying  aside  all  malice,  and  all  guile,  and  hypocrisies, 
and  envies,  and  all  evil  speakings,  Ver.  2  :  As  new-born  babes,  desire  the  sincere 
milk  of  the  word,  that  ye  may  grow  thereby. 

a  Ps.  cxix.  18 :  Open  thou  mine  eyes,  that  I  may  behold  wondrous  things  out 
of  thy  law. 

b  Heb.  iv.  2:  The  word  preached  did  not  profit  them,  not  being  mixed  with 
faith  in  them  that  heard  it.  2  Thess.  ii.  10:  And  with  all  deceivableness  of 
unrighteousness  in  them  that  perish  ;  because  they  received  not  the  love  of  the 
truth,  that  they  might  be  saved. 

c  Ps.  cxix.  ii :  Thy  word  have  I  hid  in  mine  heart,  that  I  might  not  sin  against 
thee. 

d  Luke  viii.  15  :  But  that  on  the  good  ground  are  they,  which  in  an  honest  and 
good  heart,  having  heard  the  word,  keep  it,  and  bring  forth  fruit  with  patience. 
Jas.  i.  25  :  But  whoso  looketh  into  the  perfect  law  of  liberty,  and  continueth 
therein,  he  being  not  a  forgetful  hearer,  but  a  doer  of  the  work,  this  man  shall  be 
blessed  in  his  deed. 

We  must  attend  with  diligence— Trench,  in  his  seventh  lecture  on  7 he 
Sttidy  of  Words,  as  if  he  had  had  this  very  answer  in  his  eye,  says  :  "  But 
'  attentive '  and  '  assiduous '  are  words  which  it  is  worth  our  while  to 
realize  what  they  mean.  He  then  is  '  assiduous  '  who  sits  close  to  his  work  ; 
he  is  '  attentive '  who  stretches  out  his  neck  so  that  he  may  bring  the  organ 
of  his  hearing  nearer  to  the  speaker,  and  lose  none  of  his  words.  And 
then  what  a  lesson  the  word  '  diligence '  contains  !  How  good  for  all  of  us 
to  be  reminded,  as  we  are  reminded  when  we  make  ourselves  aware  of  its 
derivation  from  diligo,  to  love,  that  the  only  secret  of  true  industry  in  our 
work  is  love  of  that  work  ! "  And  what  is  true  of  work  is  true  of  hearing 
and  reading.  Luke  tells  us  that  the  Lord  opened  Lydia's  heart  so  that 
she  attended  to  the  things  which  Paul  spoke.  And  in  the  same  way  Luther 
recommends  us  to  pause  at  every  verse  of  Scripture,  and  shake  it  as  we 
shake  the  boughs  of  a  tree  when  we  wish  to  enjoy  the  fruit.  "The  name 
familiarly  given  by  the  people  of  New  England  to  revivals  of  religion — '  a 
religious  attention,'  'a  general  attention  to  religion' — indicates  their  nature. 
...  A  revival  of  religion  is  nothing  but  the  immediate  result  of  an  un 
common  attention." — Jonathan  Edwards'  Memoirs. 

preparation,  and  prayer— The  Jews  had  such  reverence  for  their  holy 
Sabbath  that  they  held  the  Friday  afternoon  sacred  for  its  sake,  and  called 
the  Friday  afternoon  the  Preparation.  Josephus  tells  us  in  his  Antiquities 
that  his  fellow-countrymen  refused  to  do  any  business  after  the  ninth  hour, 
three  o'clock  on  Friday.  To  this  day  in  many  parts  of  the  East  the  Friday 
bears  the  additional  designation  of  the  Preparation.  And  in  many  well-ordered 
households  among  ourselves,  the  Saturday  evening  has  a  special  quietness  and 
repose  in  preparation  for  the  approaching  Lord's  day.  And  the  Catechism 
here  teaches  that  before  reading  the  word  of  God,  and  especially  before 
going  to  the  house  of  God  to  hear  His  word  preached,  the  mind  should  be 
studiously  and  habitually  put  into  a  state  of  preparation  befitting  the  solemnity 


READING  AND    HEARING   THE   WORD.  173 

and  importance  of  the  occasion.  Q.  Must  a  man  neglect  his  duty,  if  his 
heart  be  not  duly  prepared  for  it? — A.  No  ;  for  that  would  be  to  add  a  new 
sin  to  the  former,  and  aggravate  it  the  more.  Q.  Doth  unpreparedness  for 
the  word  always  hinder  its  efficacy  on  the  heart  ? — A.  No  ;  God  sometimes 
is  found  of  them  that  seek  Him  not.  But  it  is  a  sin  to  neglect  it,  and  needs 
pardon  of  God  (Flavel). 

receive  it  with  faith  and  love — "  The  heritage  of  Scepticism  is  rather  the 
settled  spirit  of  doubt  than  the  accumulated  store  of  arguments  "  (Westcott). 
(See  a  noble  passage  in  Stones  of  Venice,  II.  ii.  13,  14.) 

lay  it  up  in  our  hearts — "According  to  a  man's  thoughts  so  are  his 
affections  inflamed.  Multiplied  thoughts  inflame  affections,  and  inflamed 
affections  increase  the  number  of  thoughts  concerning  them  "  (Owen). 

"Eye  of  God's  word,  where'er  we  turn, 
Ever  upon  us  !     Thy  keen  gaze 
Can  all  the  depths  of  sin  discern, 
Unravel  every  bosom's  maze  : 

Who  that  has  felt  thy  glance  of  dread 

Thrill  through  his  heart's  remotest  cells, 

About  his  path,  about  his  bed, 

Can  doubt  what  spirit  in  thee  dwells?"— KEBLK. 

practise  it  in  our  lives.  From  the  heart'are  the  issues  of  life,  and  unless 
the  truth  be  lodged  in  the  heart,  it  is  impossible  it  can  be  practised  in  the 
life.  Practice  is  the  end  of  all  reading  and  preaching  (Matt.  vii.  24-27). 

USE. — "A  wise  man  will  make  better  use  of  an  idle  pamphlet  than  a  fool 
will  do  of  Sacred  Scripture  "  (Milton). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Enumerate  the  four  steps   here  set  forth   in   reading  or  hearing  the  word  unto 
salvation,  and  take  note  how  each  successive  step  is  characterized. 

2.  Explain  Shakespeare's  words,  and  apply  them  to  the  subject  of  preaching : 

A  jest's  prosperity  lies  in  the  ear 

Of  him  that  hears  it,  never  in  the  tongue 

Of  him  that  makes  it.     (Cf.  Matt.  xiii.  9,  236;. 

3.  Flavel  says  that  there  are  three  duties  that  belong  to  the  due  manner  of  hearing, 
—some  antecedent,  some  concomitant,  and  some  subsequent.     What  are  they  ? 

4.  Explain  the  rabbinical  saying :  A  precept  is  the  reward  of  a  precept. 


Q.  91.  How  do  the  sacraments  become  effedital  means  of  salvation  f 
A.  The  sacraments  become  effectual  means  of  salvation,  not 

from  any  virtue  in  them,  or  in  him  that  doth  administer  them ; 

but  only  by  the  blessing  of  Christ,6  and  the  working  of  his  Spirit 

in  them  that  by  faith  receive  them.f 

0  i  Pet.  iii.  21  :  The  like  figure  whereunto  even  baptism  doth  also  now  save  us, 
(not  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience 
toward  God,)  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.  Matt.  iii.  n  :  I  indeed  baptize 
you  with  water  unto  repentance  :  but  he  that  cometh  after  me  is  mightier  than  I, 


174          THE    SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

whose  shoes  I  am  not  worthy  to  bear :  he  shall  baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  with  fire,  i  Cor.  iii.  6  :  I  have  planted,  Apollos  watered  ;  but  God  gave  the 
increase.  Ver.  7  :  So  then  neither  is  he  that  planteth  any  thing,  neither  he  that 
watereth  ;  but  God  that  giveth  the  increase. 

f  i  Cor.  xii.  13  :  For  by  one  Spirit  are  we  all  baptized  into  one  body,  whether 
we  be  Jews  or  Gentiles,  whether  we  be  bond  or  free  ;  and  have  been  all  made  to 
drink  into  one  Spirit. 

effectual  means  of  salvation— For  effectual  see  Answer  31.  What  is  a 
mean  of  salvation  ?  A  mean  of  salvation  signifies  any  appointment  of  God, 
whereby  He  promotes  and  accomplishes  His  design  of  saving  our  souls ;  so 
the  word  is  a  mean,  Rom.  i.  16.  What  is  meant  by  an  effectual  mean  of 
salvation  ?  By  an  effectual  mean  is  meant  such  a  mean  as  fully  obtains  and 
accomplishes  the  end  it  was  appointed  for,  I  Thess.  ii.  13  (Flavel). 

not  from  any  virtue  in  them — "Not  from  any  power  in  themselves" 
(Larger  Catechism).  "Virtue,  Lat.  Virtus,  -tttis  (from  vir,  a  man),  the 
especial  character  of  a  man  as  opposed  to  woman  ;  courage,  strength,  power, 
merit,  worth "  (Wedgwood).  The  word  is  used  in  the  sense  of  the  text  in 
Mark  v.  30.  "  We  must  not  suppose  that  there  is  some  latent  virtue  inherent 
in  the  sacraments  by  which  they,  in  themselves,  confer  the  gifts  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  upon  us,  since  the  only  office  divinely  assigned  them  is  to  attest  and 
ratify  the  benevolence  of  the  Lord  toward  us"  (Calvin).  "The  Romish 
doctrine  upon  this  subject  is,  that  the  sacraments  contain  the  grace  which 
they  signify ;  that  they  confer  grace  always  and  certainly,  where  men  do  not 
put  an  obstacle  in  the  way ;  and  that  they  do  this  ex  opere  operato,  or  by  some 
sort  of  physical  or  intrinsic  power  bestowed  upon  them,  apart  from  the  state 
of  mind  of  the  recipients  ;  that  baptism  is  the  instrumental  cause  of  justifica 
tion  as  including  both  remission  of  sins  and  regeneration  ;  and  that  the  Lord's 
Supper  invariably  conveys  spiritual  nourishment "  (Cunningham,  Reformers, 
Essay  v.,  Zwingle  and  the  Doctrine  of  the  Sacraments.  A  fine  example  of 
Cunningham's  learning,  clearness,  and  strength).  The  student  will  see  from 
the  above  extracts  why  this  Answer  is  constructed  on  the  polemical  form  in 
which  it  stands ;  first  negative  and  then  positive. 

or  in  him  that  doth  administer  them — "  Or  any  virtue  derived  from  the 
piety  or  intention  of  him  by  whom  they  are  administered"  (Larger  Catechism). 
"A  sacrament  is  not  to  be  estimated  by  the  hand  of  him  by  whom  it  is 
administered,  but  is  to  be  received  as  from  the  hand  of  God  Himself,  from 
whom  it  undoubtedly  proceeded ;  its  dignity  neither  gains  nor  loses  by  the 
administrator." 

only  by  the  blessing  of  Christ,  and  the  working  of  his  Spirit — "The 
sacraments  duly  perform  their  office  only  when  accompanied  by  the  Spirit, 
the  internal  Master,  whose  energy  alone  penetrates  the  heart,  stirs  up  the 
affections,  and  procures  access  for  the  sacraments  into  our  souls.  If  He  is 
wanting,  the  sacraments  can  avail  us  no  more  than  the  sun  shining  on  the  eye 
balls  of  the  blind,  or  sounds  uttered  in  the  ears  of  the  deaf"  (Calvin).  "All 
the  scales  in  the  warld  will  not  worke,  except  the  Spirit  of  God  concurre,  and 
scale  the  same  truth  in  your  hearts  quhilk  the  sacrament  scales  outwardlie. 
Except  He  mak  cleare  the  sight  of  thy  mind  inwardlie,  and  worke  a  feeling 
in  thy  hart,  baith  word  and  sacrament  sail  tine  their  fruit  and  effect  quhilk 
they  suld  have.  All  the  Scriptures  are  full  of  this"  (Robert  Brace's 
Sermons,  1589). 


WHAT    IS   A   SACRAMENT?  175 

Q.  92.    What  is  a  sacrament? 

A.  A  sacrament  is  an  holy  ordinance  instituted  by  Christ ; 
wherein,  by  sensible  signs,  Christ,  and  the  benefits  of  the  new 
covenant,  are  represented,  sealed,  and  applied  to  believers.^ 

B  Gen.  xvii.  7  :  And  I  will  establish  my  covenant  between  me  and  thee,  and  thy 
seed  after  thee,  in  their  generations,  for  an  everlasting  covenant,  to  be  a  God  unto 
thee,  and  to  thy  seed  after  thee.  Ver.  10 :  This  is  my  covenant,  which  ye  shall 
keep,  between  me  and  you,  and  thy  seed  after  thee  ;  Every  man-child  among  you 
shall  be  circumcised.  Ex.  xii.  throughout,  i  Cor.  xi.  23  :  For  I  have  received  of 
the  Lord  that  which  also  I  delivered  unto  you,  That  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  same 
night  in  which  he  was  betrayed,  took  bread.  Ver.  26  :  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this 
bread,  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  shew  the  Lord's  death  till  he  come. 


A  sacrament — This  is  a  theological  and  ecclesiastical  and  not  a  biblical 
word.  The  term  sacrament  is  not  found  in  Holy  Scripture.  In  this  respect 
it  stands  on  the  same  footing  as  Trinity,  incarnation,  consubstantial,  and  such 
like  scientific  terms.  The  word  sacrament  has  a  very  interesting  and  instructive 
history.  Perhaps  the  best  and  most  accessible  summary  of  the  history  of  the  word 
will  be  found  in  Trench's  Study  of  Words,  Lect.  iv.  In  seeking  out  the  origin 
and  original  use  of  this  word  which  we  have  appropriated  to  a  religious  use, 
we  must  not  only  pass  beyond  Scripture,  but  beyond  the  Church  and  Church 
life  altogether,  and  seek  it  among  the  usages  of  the  judicial  and  military  life 
of  ancient  Rome.  The  word  sacrament,  sacramentum,  a  sacred,  a  dedicated 
thing,  originally  signified  that  sum  of  money  which  was  deposited  by  parties 
who  entered  on  a  lawsuit  before  a  Roman  tribunal  :  it  was  a  kind  of  wager  as 
to  the  right,  and  it  took  this  name  because  when  forfeited  it  was  handed  over 
to  the  treasury  of  some  temple,  or  other  sacred  institution,  much  as  contend 
ing  parties  among  ourselves  sometimes  agree  to  hand  over  forfeited  sums  to 
hospitals  or  other  public  charities.  The  word  next  came  to  signify  the 
military  oath  that  the  Roman  recruit  took  to  his  general  or  to  the  emperor. 
From  these  senses  the  term  became  extended  to  any  solemn  promise  or 
undertaking.  And  when  the  Church  took  over  the  term  into  her  vocabulary, 
she  applied  it  to  designate  certain  religious  doctrines  and  ordinances, 
especially  such  as  contained  an  element  of  mystery,  and  inwardness,  and 
depth.  Thus  the  word  sacramentum  was  employed  in  the  Vulgate  to  translate 
the  Greek  word  mystery,  wherever  that  word  occurred  in  the  New  Testa 
ment  :  thus  we  find  Jerome,  in  speaking  of  the  book  of  Revelation,  saying 
tot  verba,  quot  sacramenta,  every  word  in  this  book  contains  a  mystery. 
And  thus  through  a  long  and  instructive  history  it  has  come  about  that 
baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  are  known  among  ourselves  as  the  sacraments  ; 
and  that  because  they,  by  Christ's  appointment,  mystically  represent,  seal, 
and  apply  Christ  and  the  benefits  of  the  new  covenant. 

instituted  by  Christ— "Instituted  by  Christ  in  His  Church"  (Larger 
Catechism):  "immediately  instituted  by  God "  (Confession).  To  institute 
is  to  set  up,  appoint,  originate.  The  accounts  of  the  institution  of  the  two 
sacraments  are  given  repeatedly  in  the  Gospels.  In  the  First  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians,  Paul  also  gives  us  an  authoritative  account  of  the  institution  of 
the  Supper,  which,  he  says,  he  received  of  the  Lord  Himself.  In  instituting 


176          THE    SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

the  ordinance  of  the  Supper,  Christ  Himself  knit  the  sacramental  bond 
between  the  sign  and  the  things  signified  :  and  that  bond  holds  and  operates 
wherever  and  whenever  the  Supper  is  rightly  dispensed  and  received. 

Calvin  says  that  the  term  sacrament,  taken  generally,  includes  all  the 
signs  which  God  ever  commanded  men  to  use,  that  He  might  make  them 
sure  and  confident  of  the  truth  of  His  promises.  Sometimes  God  took  a 
natural  object  and  attached  to  it  a  sacramental  significance  and  value.  The 
tree  of  life  was  such  a  sacrament  to  Adam  :  as  again  the  rainbow  was  to 
Noah.  The  tree  was  previously  a  tree,  and  the  bow  a  bow  :  but  when  they 
were,  so  to  say,  inscribed  with  the  word  of  God,  a  new  use  was  attached  to 
them  :  they  became  signs  and  seals  of  God's  covenants  :  they  became  sacra 
ments.  Miracles  were  sometimes  wrought,  on  the  other  hand,  to  seal  and 
confirm  the  bare  word  of  God,  as  in  the  case  of  trie  burning  furnace  that 
Abraham  saw,  and  the  fleece  now  dry  and  now  wet  which  fortified  Gideon's 
faith,  and  the  backgoing  shadow  on  Hezekiah's  sun-dial.  All  these  things 
were  of  the  nature  of  sacraments.  On  this  subject  Flavel  says  :  "Of  sacra 
ments  there  are  two  sorts,  some  extraordinary^and  transient,  as  the  fiery  pillar, 
the  manna,  and  the  water  out  of  the  rock  ;  and  some  ordinary  and  standing, 
as  circumcision  and  the  Passover  before  Christ,  and  baptism  and  the  Lord's 
Supper  since  Christ's  death."  But  Calvin's  instances  agree  better  with  the 
correct  definition  and  true  nature  of  a  sacrament  than  some  of  Flavel's. 
The  manna  and  the  water  were  miracles  of  grace,  and  no  doubt,  over  and 
above  their  immediate  use,  they  supported  the  faith  of  Israel  in  God  and  in 
His  promises.  But  these  things  were  not  directly  and  immediately  given  to 
Israel  as  signs  and  seals  of  the  word  of  God.  "  But  leving  the  ambiguitie  of 
the  word,  I  take  the  worde  sacrament,  as  it  is  tane  and  used  in  the  Kirk  of 
God,  for  a  haly  signe  and  seal  that  is  annexed  to  the  preached  word  of  God, 
to  seal  up  and  confirme  the  truth  contained  in  the  same  word,  in  sick  sort,  that 
I  call  not  the  seal  separated  fra  the  word  a  sacrament.  .  .  .  Therefore  the 
word  only  cannot  be  a  sacrament ;  nor  the  element  only  cannot  be  a  sacra 
ment  :  bot  word  and  element  conjunctly  man  make  a  sacrament  :  and  sa 
Augustine  said  weill,  Let  the  word  come  to  the  element  and  ye  sal  have  a 
sacrament :  then  I  call  a  sacrament  the  word  and  seal  conjunctlie,  the  ane 
hung  to  the  uther  "  (Robert  Bruce). 

by  sensible  signs— Sensible,  Lat.  sensus,  sensibilis.  The  senses  are  those 
faculties  by  which  man,  and  in  their  measure  the  lower  animals  also,  perceive 
external  objects  by  means  of  impressions  made  on  certain  organs  of  the  body. 
The  senses  are  usually  spoken  of  as  being  five  in  number,  namely,  sight, 
hearing,  taste,  smell,  and  touch.  And  that  is  called  sensible  which  possesses 
properties  or  attributes  that  affect  the  senses.  Thus  water  in  the  one  sacra 
ment,  and  bread  and  wine  in  the  other,  are  sensible,  that  is,  they  are  capable 
of  being  perceived  and  apprehended  through  the  senses  and  organs  of  the 
body.  signs — Lat.  signa,  marks  j  a  sign  is  that  by  which  anything  is 
represented,  a  token,  an  indication.  The  student  who  takes  the  trouble  will 
easily  discover  the  leading  uses  of  this  word  in  Scripture.  "  I  call  the  signs 
in  the  sacrament  quhatsoever  I'perceive  and  takis  up  be  my  outwarde  senses, 
be  myne  eye  especially.  .  .  .  The  reasoun  quherfore  I  call  them  signes  is  this  ; 
I  call  them  not  signes,  because  they  signifie  only,  as  the  bread  signifies  the 
body  of  Christ,  and  the  wine  signifies  the  blood  of  Christ.  I  call  them  not 
signes,  because  they  represent  only,  but  I  call  them  signes  because  they  have 
the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  conjoyned  with  them.  .  .  .  They  are  instruments 


A   SACRAMENT.  177 

to  deliver  and  exhibite  the  thing  that  they  signifie,  and  not  in  respect  onely 
of  their  representation,  they  are  called  signes.  For  if  they  did  nathing  bot 
represented  or  signified  a  thing  absent,  then  ony  picture  or  dead  image  suld 
be  a  sacrament.  .  .  .  There  is  na  picture  of  the  king  that  will  deliver  the 
king  unto  you ;  therefore  na  picture  can  be  a  sacrament.  .  .  .  Then,  I  say, 
[  call  the  sacraments  signs,  because  God  has  maid  them  potent  instruments 
to  deliver  that  same  thing  quhilk  they  signifie  "  (Bruce's  Sermons). 

Christ,  and  the  benefits  of  the  new  covenant — For  the  old  covenant,  the 
covenant  of  works  and  resulting  life,  see  Answer  12,  also  Confession,  chap,  vii., 
Macpherson's  edition.  And  for  HCT.V  covenant,  the  covenant  of  grace,  see 
Answer  20,  and  for  "Christ  and  the  benefits  of  the  new  covenant"  see 
Answers  20  to  38  inclusive.  "  Nowe,  I  ga  to  the  thing  signified,  and  I  call 
the  thing  signified  be  the  signes  in  the  sacrament,  that  quhilk  Irenaeus,  that 
auld  writer,  callis  the  heavenly  and  spiritual  thing,  to  wit,  hail  Christ,  with 
His  hail  gifts,  benefits,  and  graces,  applied  and  given  to  my  saul.  .  .  .  Sa  I 
call  not  the  thing  signified  the  grace  and  virtue  that  flowes  fra  Christ  onelie, 
nor  Christ  Himself  and  His  substance,  without  the  vertue  and  grace  onelie  : 
but  jointly  the  substance  with  the  graces,  hail  Christ,  God  and  man,  without 
separation  of  His  natures,  without  discretion  of  His  substance  fra  His  graces" 
(Bruce).  "The  sacraments  are  auxiliary  or  instrumental  in  conveying  to 
believing  men  the  spiritual  blessings  of  the  forgiveness  of  the  sins  which 
they  continue  to  commit,  a  growing  sense  of  God's  pardoning  mercy,  and 
grace  and  strength  to  resist  temptation  and  discharge  duty,  and  improve 
privilege,  and  to  be  ever  advancing  in  holiness  :  or,  to  adopt  the  language  of 
the  Shorter  Catechism,  the  sacraments  instrumentally  convey  assurance  of 
God's  love,  peace  of  conscience,  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  increase  of  grace, 
and  perseverance  therein  to  the  end  "  (Cunningham,  Reformers}. 

represented — Re-presented,  presented  over  again  :  as  before  in  the  word, 
so  now  in  the  sacramental  elements  and  actions.  In  addition  to  the  exposi 
tory  use  of  the  word  here,  there  may  also  be  a  certain  polemical  reference  to 
the  Popish  position  that  the  sacraments  "contain  the  grace  which  they 
signify  and  represent."  "God,  considering  our  frame,  hath  not  only 
appointed  that  we  should  be  told  of  the  great  things  of  the  gospel  and 
the  redemption  of  Christ,  and  be  instructed  in  them  by  His  word  :  but 
also  that  they  should  be,  as  it  were,  exhibited  to  our  view  by  sensible  represen 
tations,  the  more  to  affect  us  with  them  "  (Jonathan  Edwards). 

sealed — "A  metaphor  from  contracts"  (Bengel).  Lat.  sigillum,  diminu 
tive  of  signum,  a  mark  or  sign  ;  a  securing  and  authenticating  mark  or 
stamp.  Hence  that  which  confirms  and  ratifies  a  promise  or  an  engagement  ; 
as  in  many  Scripture  passages.  The  classical  Scripture  passage  for  the 
sacramental  use  of  sign  and  seal  is  of  course  Rom.  iv.  1 1,  on  which  Schaff, 
supplementing  Lange,  remarks  :  "We  have  here  an  intimation  of  the  true 
idea  of  sacraments  :  they  are  signs,  seals,  and  means  of  grace,  but  not  the 
grace  itself.  Circumcision  is  not  the  covenant,  neither  is  baptism  regenera 
tion.  A  sign  and  seal  can  never  be  the  substitute  for  the  thing  signed  and 
sealed,  nor  should  it  be  made  a  ground  of  confidence  or  hope  ;  but  it  is  all- 
important  as  a  divine  ratification,  and  gives,  so  to  say,  legal  validity  to  our 
claims,  as  the  governmental  seal  to  a  written  instrument."  And  Bruce  is 
here,  as  always,  as  true  as  he  is  racy  :  "  Sacraments  serve  to  this  end  also,  to 
seal  up  and  confirm  the  truth  that  is  in  the  word  :  for  as  the  office  of  the  scale 

M 


178          THE    SHORTER    CATECHISM    WITH    A    COMMENTARY. 

hung  to  the  evident  is  not  to  confirme  ane  uther  truth  nor  that  quhilk  is  in  the 
evident ;  and  suppose  ye  believed  the  evident  of  before,  yet  be  the  scales  ye 
beleeve  it  the  better  ;  even  sa,  the  sacrament  assures  me  of  na  uther  truth 
nor  is  conteined  within  the  word  :  yit  because  it  is  a  scale  annexed  to  the 
word,  it  persuades  me  the  better  of  the  same  :  for  as  the  mair  that  the 
outward  senses  be  walkned,  the  mair  is  the  inward  hart  and  mind  persuaded 
to  belief.  Now,  the  sacrament  walknes  all  the  outward  senses,  sick  as  the 
eye,  the  hand,  and  all  the  rest :  and  the  outward  senses  being  moved,  na 
question,  the  Spirit  of  God  concurring  therewith,  moves  the  hart  the  mair." 
(See  Cruden's  full  and  admirable  analysis  of  this  scriptural  term.) 

and  applied — The  Larger  Catechism  has  "signify,  seal,  and  exhibit"  At 
first  sight  exhibit  seems  a  repetition  of  signify,  but  when  we  carefully  examine 
the  word  we  find  that  apply  was  a  once  well-known  though  now  obsolete 
sense  of  exhibit.  In  its  modern  sense  exhibit  means  much  the  same  as 
represent  or  signify,  but  in  old  Scotch  and  English  it  meant,  as  it  still  means 
in  the  technical  language  of  medicine,  and  as  in  the  text  of  the  Larger  Cate 
chism,  to  deliver  over,  to  administer,  to  make  application  of.  Thus  Bruce  : 
"  The  sacrament  exhibits  and  delivers  the  thing  that  it  signifies  to  the  soul  and 
hart.  Then  in  respect  the  Lord  hes  appointed  the  sacrament  as  hand  to 
deliver  and  exhibit  the  thing  signified."  And  Bishop  Gardner  :  "  But  in  this 
sacrament,  we  be  made  participaunt  of  His  Godhode,  by  His  humanite 
exhibits  vnto  vs  for  fode."  And  George  Gillespie,  explaining  what  "  exhibi- 
tive  signs  "  mean  in  Protestant  writers,  says  :  "  I  answer,  that  exhibition  is  a 
real,  effectual,  lively  application  of  Christ,  and  of  all  His  benefits,  to  every  one 
that  believeth,  for  the  staying,  strengthening,  confirming,  and  comforting  of 
the  soul  "  (Aaron's  Rod  Blossoming,  Book  III.  chap.  xii.). 

to  believers.  This  is  a  scriptural  name  and  description  of  those  who  are 
true  disciples  of  Christ  and  genuine  children  of  God.  See  Acts  v.  14  ; 
I  Tim.  iv.  12.  This  name  is  borne  by  those  who  by  faith  receive,  depend, 
and  rely  upon  Jesus  Christ  for  salvation  and  eternal  life.  And  the  doctrine 
of  the  Catechism  is  that  the  sacraments  are  appointed  for  such,  and  for 
such  alone.  A  full  discussion  of  the  question  as  to  whether  the  sacraments 
are  regenerating  and  converting  ordinances  will  be  found  in  the  fourth  book 
of  George  Gillespie's  Aaron's  2\od  Blossoming.  Jonathan  Edwards  also,  with 
all  his  matchless  strength  and  insight,  fully  discusses  this  matter.  Dr. 
Cunningham  epitomizes  Gillespie's  arguments  in  his  essay  on  Zwingle  and  the 
Doctrine  of  the  Sacraments,  an  essay  that  all  students  who  would  understand 
the  Reformed  doctrine  aslto  the  sacraments  should  carefully  read.  Divinity 
students  are  earnestly  urged  to  master  Robert  Brace's  Five  Sermons  on  the 
Sacraments.  They  who  do  so  will  carry  clear  and  fruitful  views  with  them 
into  their  expositions  and  exhortations  in  connection  with  this  'important 
subject.  Professor  James  Candlish's  beautiful  Handbook  is  accessible  to  all. 

USES. — I.  "  It  wald  be  speered,  Quherefore  are  sacraments  annexed,  seeing 
we  gat  na  mair  in  the  sacrament  nor  we  get  in  the  word  ?  Thy  hart 
cannot  wist  nor  imagine  a  greater  gift  nor  to  have  the  Sonne  of  God, 
quha  is  King  of  heaven  and  earth.  And  therefore,  I  say,  quhat  new 
thing  wald  thou  have  ?  The  sacrament  is  appointed  that  we  may  get  a 
better  grip  of  Christ  nor  we  get  in  the  simple  word.  The  sacraments 
are  appointed  that  I  might  have  Him  mair  fullic  in  my  saul  ;  that  lie 


THE  SACRAMENTS  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       170 

might  make  the  better  residence  in  me.  This,  na  doubt,  is  the  cause 
quherefore  thir  scales  are  annexed  to  the  evident  of  the  simple 
word"  (Bruce). 

2.  "Therefore  let  it  be  a  fixed  point,  that  the  office  of  the  sacrament 
differs  not  from  that  of  the  word  of  God ;  and  this  is  to  hold  forth  and 
offer  Christ  to  us,  and  in  Him  the  treasure  of  heavenly  grace  "  (Calvin). 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Derive  Sacrament,  and  giue  some  account  of  the  changes  through  which  this 
term  has  passed. 

2.  Explain  and  illustrate  the  phrase  sensible  signs. 

3.  What  does  Augustine  mean  when  he  says  that  a  sacrament  is  a  visible  word? 
And  again,  that  there  may  bo   invisible  sanctification  without  the  visible  sign, 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  a  visible  sign  without  true  sanctification  ? 

4.  Set  forth  in  Catechism  language  some  of  the  benefits  of  the  covenant  of  grace. 

5.  State  shortly  the  Protestant  doctrine  of  the  sacraments  as  seals  ;  and  illustrate 
and  establish  from  Scripture, 

6.  Explain  Manton's  words:  On  God's  part  the  sacraments  are  signs  and  seals, 
on  our  part  they  are  a  badge  and  a  bond. 


Q.  93.   Which  are  the  sacraments  of  the  New  Testament1! 
A.  The  sacraments  of  the  New  Testament  are,  Baptism,h  and 
the  Lord's  Supper.1 

h  Matt,  xxviii.  19  :  Go  ye  therefore,  and  teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the 
name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

1  Matt.  xxvi.  26 :  And  as  they  were  eating,  Jesus  took  bread,  and  blessed  it, 
and  brake  it,  and  gave  it  to  the  disciples,  and  said,  Take,  eat ;  this  is  my  body. 
Ver.  27 :  And  he  took  the  cup,  and  gave  thanks,  and  gave  it  to  them,  saying, 
Drink  ye  all  of  it :  Ver.  28  :  For  this  is  my  blood  of  the  new  testament,  which  is 
shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins. 

The  Church  of  Rome  having  departed  from  apostolic  teaching  and  practice 
in  regard  to  the  sacraments,  has  added  to  Baptism  and  the  Supper  these  five, 
namely,  Confirmation,  Penance,  Ordination,  Marriage,  and  Extreme  Unction. 
The  careful  study  of  the  scriptural  teaching  set  forth  under  Question  92  will 
enable  the  student  to  see  how  and  where  these  ordinances  and  institutions  and 
practices  fall  short  of  the  true  nature  and  function  of  sacraments. 


Q.  94.    What  is  baptism  ? 

A.  Baptism  is  a  sacrament,  wherein  the  washing  with  water  in 
the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,J 
doth  signify  and  seal  our  ingrafting  into  Christ,  and  partaking  of 

J  Matt,  xxviii.  19.     [See  in  letter  h.] 


I  So         THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A  COMMENTARY. 

the  benefits  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  our  engagement  to  be 
the  Lord's.* 

k  Rom.  vi.  4  :  Therefore  we  are  buried  with  him  by  baptism  into  death  ;  that 
like  as  Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,  even  so  we 
also  should  walk  in  newness  of  life.  Gal.  iii.  27 :  For  as  many  of  you  as  have 
been  baptized  into  Christ  have  put  on  Christ. 

Liddell  and  Scott  in  their  Greek  Lexicon  give  only  the  classical  senses  of  the 
word  baptism.  The  example,  taken  from  Homer,  is  that  of  a  smith  temper 
ing  the  red-hot  steel  by  plunging  it  in  water.  The  word  was  used  of  the  dyer 
also  who  steeped  his  fabrics  in  a  vat ;  of  a  vessel  also  when  let  down  to  draw 
up  water  ;  and  of  a  ship  dipping  when  launched  or  loaded.  These  are  the 
original  and  root  ideas  in  the  word  baptism.  The  scriptural  and  ecclesiastical 
use  of  the  word  is  familiar  to  all  through  John's  ministry  as  the  forerunner  of 
our  Lord.  The  epithet  of  "The  Baptist"  was  given  to  him  because  of  the 
prominence  he  gave  to  that  ceremony.  In  his  ministry  baptism  symbolized 
the  purifying  of  the  unclean  heart  and  character  of  the  penitent,  and  his 
entrance  on  a  purer  and  holier  life.  And  this  Johannine  idea  is  at  the  root 
of  all  those  Pauline  passages  where  Christian  baptism  is  alluded  to  and 
enforced.  New  ideas  are  added  ;  more  evangelical  and  more  sacramental 
ideas  were  added  to  the  original  idea  and  doctrine  of  baptism  after  Christ's 
mission  and  work  were  fully  understood  in  the  Church.  But  the  Catechism 
here  gives  both  the  original  and  the  fuller  contents  of  the  word  with  admirable 
clearness  and  completeness. 

The  washing  with  water — "  Whether  the  person  baptized  is  to  be  wholly 
immersed,  and  that  once  or  thrice,  or  whether  he  is  only  to  be  sprinkled  with 
water,  is  not  of  the  least  consequence.  Churches  should  be  at  liberty  to 
adopt  either,  according  to  the  diversity  of  climates,  although  it  is  evident  that 
the  term  baptize  means  to  immerse,  and  that  this  was  the  form  used  by  the 
primitive  Church"  (Calvin).  "  Dipping  of  the  person  into  the  water  is  not 
necessary  ;  but  baptism  is  rightly  administered  by  pouring  or  sprinkling  water 
upon  the  person"  (Confession).  (See  Macpherson's  notes.) 

in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost — /;/ 

or  unto  the  name.  That  is,  the  washing,  dipping,  or  sprinkling,  symbolizes  the 
separation  of  the  baptized  person  from  all  his  evil  past,  and  his  entrance  on  a 
new  life  in  and  unto  the  Father,  and  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  Their 
names  are  themselves  ;  as  Candlish  points  out,  their  names  are  all  "  that 
whereby  they  make  themselves  known."  Unto  all  that  the  baptized  person 
is  delivered  over.  Butler  points  out  how,  as  the  dispensations  of  Revelation 
are  developed,  new  obligations  of  duty,  unknown  before,  are  revealed  ;  and 
he  instances  baptism  into  the  names  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  as  an 
illustration.  But  in  the  evangelical  system,  baptism  is  less  an  entrance  on 
new  duties  than  an  admission  into  new  privileges  and  blessings  out  of  which 
both  duty  and  ability  arise  (Analogy,  ii.  i). 

doth  signify  and  seal — On  the  true  meaning  of  these  terms  in  the  sacra 
mental  system,  see  Answer  92,  and  the  works  there  recommended.  Those 
who  have  read  Church  history,  and  who  are  observers  of  contemporary  Church 
life,  and  who  have  been  taught  the  truth  about  the  sacraments,  as  it  is  drawn 
from  the  Scriptures  and  embodied  in  the  best  Reformed  and  Puritan  symbols, 


\VPIAT    IS   feAPTISM?  l8l 

will  not  think  Dr.  Cunningham's  words  one  whit  too  strong,  when  he  says, 
"  The  doctrine  of  baptismal  regeneration  has  been  perhaps  as  powerful  and 
extensive  a  cause  of  deadly  error  as  any  doctrine  that  Satan  ever  invented." 
(See  chap.  xxii.  of  his  Historical  Theology,'] 

our  ingrafting — The  classical  passages  in  the  Scriptures  for  the  use  of  thitj 
metaphor  are  of  course  John  xv.  and  Rom.  xi.  16-24.  And  Paul  connects  the 
figure  of  ingrafting  with  the  ordinance  of  baptism  in  Rom.  vi.  1-6.  Baptism 
does  not  effect  our  ingrafting  into  Christ,  it  only  signifies  and  seals  it.  The 
ingrafting  is  performed  in  regeneration,  which  is  union  to  Christ  as  our  Life, 
our  Head,  and  our  Root. 

"  He  who  is  baptized  puts  on  Christ^  the  Second  Adam  ;  he  is  baptized,  I 
say,  into  a  whole  Christ,  and  so  also  into  His  death,  and  it  is  the  same  thing 
as  if,  at  that  moment,  Christ  suffered,  died,  and  was  buried  for  such  a  man, 
and  as  if  such  a  man  suffered,  died,  and  was  buried  with  Christ  "  (Bengel). 

and  our  engagement  to  be  the  Lord's.  "An  open  and  professed  engage 
ment  to  be  wholly  and  only  the  Lord's"  (Larger  Catechism).  "His  giving  him 
self  up  unto  God  through  Jesus  Christ  to  walk  in  newness  of  life  "  (Confession). 
"  Who  is  this  that  engaged  his  heart  to  approach  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord  ?  " 
(Jeremiah).  "  On  our  part,  baptism  is  a  badge  and  a  bond  to  oblige  us  to 
the  duties  of  the  covenant, — a  badge  of  the  profession,  and  a  bond  to  engage 
us  to  the  duties  which  that  profession  calls  for  "  (Manton). 

"Them  who  shall  believe 
Baptizing  in  the  profluent  stream,  the  sign 
Of  washing  them  from  guilt  of  sin  to  life 
Pure,  and  in  mind  prepar'd,  if  so  befall, 
For  death,  like  that  which  the  Redeemer  di'd." 

—MILTON. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Glue  some  examples  of  the  original  use  of  the  Greek  word  baptism. 

2.  Show  that  it  is  not  the  amount  of  water  used,  nor  the  manner  of  its  application, 
that  Is  the  essential  thing  in  baptism. 

3.  Explain  the  metaphor  of  ingrafting,  and  give  examples  of  its  scriptural  uses. 


Q.  95.   To  whom  is  baptism  to  be  administered '? 

A.  Baptism  is  not  to  be  administered  to  any  that  are  out  of 
the  visible  church,  till  they  profess  their  faith  in  Christ,  and 
obedience  to  him  j1  but  the  infants  of  such  as  are  members  of 
the  visible  church  are  to  be  baptized.111 

1  Acts  viii.  36  :  And  as  they  went  on  their  way,  they  came  unto  a  certain  water  : 
and  the  eunuch  said,  See,  here  is  water  ;  what  doth  hinder  me  to  be  baptized  ? 
Ver.  37  :  And  Philip  said,  If  thou  belicvcst  with  all  thine  heart,  thou  mayest. 
And  he  answered  and  said,  I  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God.  Acts 
ii.  38  :  Then  Peter  said  unto  them,  Repent,  and  be  baptized  every  one  of  you  in 
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  ye  shall  receive  the  gift 
of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

m  Acts  ii.  38.  [See  before.]  Ver.  39:  For  the  promise  is  unto  you,  and  to 
your  children.  Gen.  xvii.  10.  [See  in  letter  «.]  Compared  with  Col.  ii.  ii,  12. 
i  Cor.  vii.  14 :  Else  were  your  children  unclean  ;  but  now  arc  they  holy. 


1 82  THE    SHORTER    CATECHISM    WITH    A    COMMENTARY. 

Baptism  is  not  to  be  administered — This  Answer  consists  of  two  parts, — 
the  first  part  takes  up  the  case  of  adults,  and  the  second  touches  on  the  case 
of  infants.  That  the  teaching  of  the  Catechism  as  to  the  admission  of  adults 
is  in  accordance  with  the  mind  of  Christ,  is  evident  from  the  terms  of  the 
baptismal  commission  our  Lord  issued  to  His  disciples,  and  from  the  invari 
able  practice  of  His  apostles.  On  a  profession  of  faith  in  Christ,  men  were 
to  be  baptized  and  thus  admitted  into  the  visible  Church. 

the  visible  church — The  Confession  thus  defines  and  describes  the  Church 
invisible  and  visible.  "The  Catholic  or  universal  Church,  which  is  invisible, 
consists  of  the  whole  number  of  the  elect,  that  have  been,  are,  or  shall  be 
gathered  into  one,  under  Christ  the  Head  thereof ;  and  is  the  spouse,  the 
body,  the  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all.  The  visible  Church  consists 
of  all  those  throughout  the  world  that  profess  the  true  religion,  together  with 
their  children."  "I  have  observed,"  says  Calvin,  "that  the  Scriptures 
speak  of  the  Church  in  two  ways.  Sometimes  when  they  speak  of  the  Church, 
they  mean  the  Church  as  it  is  before  God, — the  Church  into  which  none  are 
admitted  but  those  who  by  the  gift  of  adoption  are  sons  of  God,  and  by  the 
sanctification  of  the  Spirit  are  true  members  of  Christ.  Often,  too,  by  the 
name  of  Church  is  designated  the  whole  body  of  mankind  scattered  through 
out  the  world,  who  profess  to  worship  one  God  and  Christ,  who  by  baptism 
are  initiated  into  the  faith."  Accordingly,  when  the  apostles  preached  Christ, 
they  always  demanded  a  profession  of  faith  in  Him  before  they  administered 
baptism  in  His  name  ;  and  our  missionaries,  who  are  in  this  respect  incon- 
testably  the  true  successors  of  the  apostles,  invariably  act  on  this  principle. 

but  the  infants — Infant  baptism  is  sometimes  called  pado  -  baptism , 
from  the  Greek  word  f  aides.  The  Directory  for  Public  Worship  says,  that 
children  of  professing  parents  are  Christians,  and  federally  holy  before  bap 
tism,  and  therefore  are  they  baptized  ;  for  their  baptism  supposeth  them  to 
be  Church  members,  and  doth  not  make  or  constitute  them  such.  And  in 
Jonathan  Edwards'  Qualifications  for  Communion,  it  is  set  forth  as  the 
general  opinion  of  Protestant  divines  that  the  same  qualifications  are  required 
in  a  parent  bringing  his  child  to  baptism  as  in  an  adult  person  for  his 
own  admission  to  this  ordinance.  This  is  not  the  place  to  set  forth 
the  scriptural  arguments  and  considerations  that  have  led  the  vast  majority 
of  Christian  parents  in  all  ages  to  seek  baptism  for  their  children.  There 
exists  a  large  literature  that  has  sprung  up  in  connection  with  this  observance. 
And  the  reader  may  be  referred  to  Calvin,  Cunningham,  Hodge,  M'Crie, 
and  Edwards  for  the  arguments  that  support  the  practice  of  Christendom 
and  the  doctrines  of  the  Catechism.  As  to  the  connection  between  the 
naming  of  children  and  their  baptism,  Alford  says  :  "The  names  of  children 
were  given  at  circumcision,  because,  at  the  institution  of  that  rite,  the  names 
of  Abram  and  Sarai  were  changed  to  Abraham  and  Sarah."  A  not  less 
historical,  if  less  remote  origin  of  this  practice  was  the  giving  of  a  new  name 
to  heathen  converts,  on  their  public  reception  into  the  Church  by  baptism. 
"  The  giving  of  a  child  its  name,  was  no  more  a  part  of  the  original  intent 
of  circumcision  than  of  baptism ;  it  was  an  incidental  circumstance  that 
custom  had  added.  And  I  cannot  forbear  saying,  that,  in  administering 
baptism,  I  think  care  should  be  taken  so  to  order  the  voice  that  it  may 
plainly  appear  that  we  then  only  speak  to  the  child  by  the  name  that  hath 
been  already  given  to  it "  (Doddridge). 

USES  i. — "  It  is  no  slight  stimulus  to  bring  up  our  children  in  the  fear  of 


THE    LORD'S    SUPPER.  183 

God,  and  the  observance  of  His  law,  when  we  reflect  that  from  their 
birth  they  have  been  considered  and  acknowledged  by  Him  as  His 
children  "  (Calvin). 

2.  But  we  have  no  express  command  in  the  New  Testament  to  baptize 
infants.      There  needed  no  new  command  ;    their  privilege   had   been 
settled  many  years    before  on   them,   and  never  reversed  by  Christ  or 
His  apostles,  but  their  former  right  declared  to  continue  to  them  still. 
For  the  promise  is  to  you  and  to  your  children  (Acts  ii.  39). 

3.  But  many  baptized  infants  prove  naught.     And  so  do  many  baptized 
at  age  too.     Duties  are  not  to  be  measured  by  events  (Flavel). 


Q.  96.    What  is  the  Lord's  supper1} 

A.  The  Lord's  supper  is  a  sacrament,  wherein,  by  giving  and 
receiving  bread  and  wine,  according  to  Christ's  appointment,  his 
death  is  showed  forth ;  and  the  worthy  receivers  are,  not  after  a 
corporal  and  carnal  manner,  but  by  faith,  made  partakers  of  his 
body  and  blood,  with  all  his  benefits,  to  their  spiritual  nourish 
ment,  and  growth  in  grace. n 

n  i  Cor.  xi.  23  :  For  I  have  received  of  the  Lord  that  which  also  I  delivered 
unto  you,  That  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  same  night  in  which  he  was  betrayed,  took 
bread  :  Ver.  24 :  And,  when  he  had  given  thanks,  he  brake  it,  and  said,  Take, 
cat ;  this  is  my  body,  which  is  broken  for  you  :  this  do  in  remembrance  of  me. 
Ver.  25 :  After  the  same  manner  also  he  took  the  cup,  when  he  had  supped, 
saying,  This  cup  is  the  new  testament  in  my  blood  :  this  do  ye,  as  oft  as  ye  drink 
it,  in  remembrance  of  me.  Ver.  26  :  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread,  and  drink 
this  cup,  ye  do  shew  the  Lord's  death  till  he  come,  i  Cor.  x.  16  :  The  cup  of 
blessjng  which  we  bless,  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  blood  of  Christ?  the 
bread  which  we  break,  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  body  of  Christ  ? 

The  Lord's  Supper — The  second  sacrament  of  the  New  Testament  has 
several  names  given  to  it  in  Scripture  according  to  the  way  it  is  looked  at,  and 
according  to  the  feature  in  this  ordinance  that  is  specially  pointed  at — (i) 
Luke's  favourite  name  for  the  Supper  is  "the breaking  of  bread"  (see  Luke 
xxiv.  30  ;  Acts  ii.  42,  xx.  7).  (2)  The  second  scriptural  name  given  to  this 
sacrament  is  "  the  communion  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  "  (i  Cor. 
x.  16).  This  name  brings  out  that  idea  of  spiritual  community  and  believing 
and  loving  fellowship  which  is  an  essential  element  in  this  ordinance. 
(3)  The  third  scriptural  designation  is  the  Eucharist,  or  the  thanksgiving, 
referring  to  Matt.  xxvi.  26,  27 ;  I  Cor.  xi.  24,  and  xiv.  16.  The  Western 
Church  translated  the  Greek  Eiicharist  into  the  Latin  actio  gratiarum  ;  and 
it  is  from  this  latter  phrase  we  still  retain  the  name  of  action  sermon,  the 
sermon  before  the  action.  (4)  The  fourth,  and  perhaps  the  most  universal 
and  familiar  name,  is  the  Lord's  Supper  or  the  Lord's  Table.  It  is  called  a 
Supper  because  it  takes  the  place  in  the  New  Testament  Church  of  the 
Passover  Supper  in  the  Old  Economy.  And  it  bears  the  name  of  the  Lord's 
Supper  because  our  Lord  instituted  it,  and  because  in  it  Christ  and  all  His 
benefits  are  represented,  sealed,  and  applied  to  believers.  "It  is  called  also 
'  the  Supper  of  the  Lorde,'  to  put  a  difference  betwixt  it  and  ane  prophane 
supper ;  for  this  is  the  Lord's  Supper,  a  halie  supper,  not  a  prophane  nor 


184         THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

common  supper  ;  a  supper  appointed  for  the  increase  of  haliness,  for  the 
foode  of  the  saule  in  haliness,  to  feede  the  soule  to  life  everlasting.  It  is 
called  also  in  the  Bible  the  '  Table  of  the  Lord,'  it  is  not  called  the  Altar 
of  the  Lord  ;  but  the  apostle  calls  it  a  table  to  sit  at,  and  not  ane  altar  to 
stand  at ;  a  table  to  take  and  receave,  and  not  an  altar  to  offer  and  propine  " 
(Bruce). 

'  by  giving  and  receiving  bread  and  wine— "Communicating."  "Take 
this,  and  divide  it  among  yourselves."  "For  we  being  many  are  one  bread, 
and  one  body  ;  for  we  are  all  partakers  of  that  one  bread.1' 

"  Sweet  solemn  hour  !    The  only  sound 
The  sacred  symbols  passing  round, 
Offering  by  turns  on  Jesus'  part 
The  Cross  to  every  hand  and  htart." 

"  Are  not  bread  and  wine  too  small  and  common  things  to  represent  the 
body  and  blood  of  Christ?  Though  a  bit  of  bread  and  'a  draught  of  wine 
be  of  small  value  in  themselves,  yet  they  are  great  ( in  respect  of  their  use 
and  end.  A  pennyworth  of  wax  is  a  small  thing  in  itself,  but  being  applied 
to  the  label  of  a  deed,  may  be  advanced  to  the  value  of  thousands  of  pounds, 
as  it  receives  the  seal  of  a  great  inheritance  "  (Flavel). 

according  to  Christ's  appointment — (See  the  accounts  of  the  institution  of 
the  Supper  in  the  Gospels  and  in  First  Corinthians.)  On  John  vi.  Bengel 
says  :  "Jesus  framed  His  words  so  skilfully,  that  immediately  at  the  time,  and 
at  all  times  subsequently,  they  would  indeed  apply  in  their  strict  literal  sense  to 
the  spiritual  enjoyment  of  Himself ;  and  yet  that  afterwards,  the  same  words 
should  by  consequence  be  appropriate  to  express  the  most  august  mystery  of 
the  Holy  Supper,  when  that  should  be  instituted.  .  .  .  The  whole  of  those 
words  concerning  His  flesh  and  blood  have  in  view  the  Passion  of  Jesus,  and 
along  with  it  the  Holy  Supper."  But  some  able  and  evangelical  Protestant 
divines  have  denied  that  our  Lord  had  any  reference  at  all  to  the  Supper  in 
His  great  discourse  in  the  sixth  of  John.  And  when  we  reflect  on  the 
disastrous  effects  the  Popish  and  High  Church  interpretation  of  that  discourse 
has  had  on  the  Church  of  Christ,  we  would  gladly  believe  that  Bengel's  first 
explanation  is  the  true  and  exclusive  one. 

his  death  is  showed  forth — Represented.     See  Answer  92 ;  Gal.  iii.  I. 

the  worthy  receivers — No  man  properly  speaking  is  worthy.  But  worth 
is  one  thing  when  a  communicant  is  viewed  in  himself,  and  it  is  another  thing 
when  he  is  looked  at  as  in  Christ,  and  invited  by  Him.  Worth  is  one  thing  in 
the  covenant  of  works,  when  worth  is  measured  by  personal  merit,  and  it  is  an 
altogether  different  thing  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  when  worth  is  measured 
according  to  the  work  and  merit  of  Christ,  and  the  reality  of  a  believer's  union 
with  Him.  He  who  esteems  himself  to  be  worthy  is  clearly  debarred  from 
the  table  :  a  sense  of  utter  un worthiness  is  one  mark  of  worth  in  a  communi 
cant.  "  Are  morally  honest  and  sober  persons  qualified  for  this  sacrament  ? 
No  ;  civility  and  morality  do  not  qualify  persons  :  they  are  not  the  wedding- 
garment,  but  regenerating  grace  and  faith  in  the  smallest  measure  are  " 
(Flavel).  Morality  ^QQ.^  not  qualify,  though  immorality  absolutely,  and  in 
all  men,  disqualifies  and  shuts  out.  On  this  whole  subject  see  the  able  and 
scriptural  discussion  in  the  Larger  Catechism. 

not  after  a  corporal  or  carnal  manner,  but  by  faith  made  partakers  of 
his  body  and  blood — This  is  directed  against  the  Popish  doctrines  of  tran- 


THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  185 

substantiation,  According  to  that  doctrine,  the  bread  and  wine  are  changed 
info  the  very  flesh  and  blood  of  Christ,  so  that  all  communicants  literally  and 
physically  eat  the  flesh  and  drink  the  blood  of  Christ.  But  the  Catechism, 
in  common  with  all  the  Reformed  and  Evangelical  symbols,  teaches  the 
scriptural  and  sacramental  doctrines  of  the  Supper.  It  is  the  soul  that  sups 
here,  and  not  the  body.  The  communicant  looks  not  on  the  things  which 
are  seen,  but  on  the  things  which  are  not  seen.  Only,  as  the  soul  resides 
in  the  body,  and  is  ministered  to  in  intellectual  and  spiritual  things  by 
means  of  the  body,  so  is  it  at  the  supper-table.  There  is  nothing  on  this 
table  worth  speaking  of  for  the  needs  of  the  body  ;  all  that  is  here  is  for  the 
soul  ;  and  it  is  here  offered  and  received  in  a  bodily  way,  only  because 
thus  the  true  supper  of  the  soul  is  more  vividly  and  impressively  brought 
before  it.  .  "  It  is  the  Spirit  that  quickeneth  ;  the  flesh  profiteth  nothing  ;  the 
words  that  I  speak  unto  you,  they  are  spirit,  and  they  are  life." 

with,  all  his  benefits— See  under  Question  92.  (Cf.  Ps.  Ixviii.  19,  ciii. 
2-5,  cxvi.  12.) 

to  their  spiritual  nourishment— Spiritual  because  administered  to  the 
spiritual  man,  and  because  administered  to  him  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  The 
meaning  is  not  exhausted  by  the  antithesis  between  carnal  and  spiritual) 
taken  in  the  sense  of  bodily  and  mental.  Spiritual  here  is  opposed  both  to 
the  corporal  participation  of  the  Papist,  and  the  merely  carnal  participation 
of  the  unspiritual  man.  (See  the  profound  and  fruitful  exposition  of  this 
scriptural  word  in  Jonathan  Edwards'  Religious  Affections,  Part  iii.  sect,  i.) 
"  Now  in  respect  this  flesh  is  a  spirituall  food,  serving  me  to  a  spirituall  life, 
for  this  cause  it  is  called  a  spiritual  thing.  It  is  called  spirituall,  in  respect 
to  the  spirituall  encle  quhareunto  it  servis  to  my  body  and  soul  :  because  the 
flesh  and  blood  of  Christ  servis  to  nurish  mee,  not  to  a  temporal  life,  but  to  a 
spirituall  and  heavenly  life  "  (Bruce). 

growth  in  grace.  Neither  Baptism  nor  the  Supper  is  for  the  beginning  or 
implanting  of  grace  in  the  soul  :  grace  must  be  in  the  soul  already  before  the 
sacraments  are  partaken  of  with  any  right  meaning  or  good  result.  George 
Gillcspie  argues  at  great  length,  following  Calvin  and  other  Reformers,  that 
the  Supper  is  not  a  converting  ordinance,  but  that  it  is  given  to  nourish  and 
increase  the  life  of  grace  when  it  has  been  already  begun  ;  and  he  adds  that 
the  sacraments  are  just  another  example  of  the  rule,  "  Unto  every  one  that 
hath  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have  abundance  :  but  from  him  that  hath 
not  shall  be  taken  away  even  that  which  he  hath."  (See  Jonathan  Edwards, 
Concerning  Qualifications  for  Communion.) 

USES.— I.  Flavel  points  out  to  those  who  study  this  subject  that  the 
remembrance  of  Christ  here  intended  is  not  a  mere  speculative  or 
historical,  but  an  affectionate  and  appropriating  remembrance. 

2.  "Pious  souls  may  derive  great  confidence  and  delight  from  this  sacra 
ment,  as  being  a  testimony  that  they  form  one  body  with  Christ,  so  that 
anything  which  is  His  they  may  call  their  own  "  (Calvin). 

3.  "  Speers  thou  quhat  new  thing  we  get  in  the  sacrament  ?     I  say,  we  get 
Christ  better  nor  we  did  before  :  we  get  a  better  grip  of  Christ  now. 
That  same  thing  quhilk  thou  possessed  be  the  hearing  of  the  word,  thou 
possesses  now  more  largely.     For  be  the  sacrament  my  faith  is  nurished, 
the  bounds  of  my  soull  are  enlarged,  and  sn,  quhcn  I  had  but  a  little 


l86          THE    SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH    A    COMMENTARY. 

grip  of  Christ  before,  as  it  were  betwixt  my  finger  and  my  thumb,  now 
I  get  Him  in  my  haill  hand  :  for  aye  the  mair  my  faith  growes,  the 
better  grip  I  get  of  Christ  Jesus  "  (Brace). 


QUESTIONS. 

1.  Derive  and  'explain   the  leading  names  applied  to    this   ordinance  In  the   New 
Testament. 

2.  Stewart  of  Cromarty,   in  his  Tree  of  Promise  (a  work  of  genius),   says  :  The 
J3/rish  Passover  was  a  discriminative,  commemorative,  typical,  and  prophetical 
ordinance.    Explain  and  illustrate   these  epithets,  and  point  out  their  application  to 
cur  Christian  Passover. 

3.  What  did  the   Reformers  and  Puritans    mean  by  their  axiom  to  the  effect  the 
Supper  is   not   a   converting  but  a  quickening  and  confirming  ordinance?     To 
what  Scottish   and  American  authors   would  you  turn  for  a  thorough  discussion  of 
this  important  subject  ? 

4.  Goodwin  teaches  in  his  Trial  of  a  Christian's  Growth  that  we  grow  in  grace 
(a)  by  the  adding  of  one  grace  to  another ;   (b)  by  additions  of  new  degrees  to 
the  same  grace ;  (c)  by  increased  spirituality  in  duties ;  (d)  by  bringing  forth 
fruits  more  in  thoir  season,  and  such  like.    Give  illustrations. 

5.  Commit  ths  following  verses  on  the  words,  He  gave  Thanks,  which  Mr.  Grant 
of  Ayr  intended  to  add  to  p.  16  in  ths  ninth  edition  of  his  admirable  little  book  on 
the  Lord's  Supper: — 

And  couldst  Thou,  Lord,  Thy  thanks  express 
In  prospect  of  Thy  deep  distress,    ' 
And  at  the  table  spread  to  show 
The  symbols  of  Thy  coming  woe  ? 

And  couldst  Thou  bless  Thy  God  on  hi£ii 
That  He  had  sent  Thee  thus  to  die, 
And  for  our  sins  thus  give  Thee  up 
To  drink  wrath's  overwhelming  cup  ? 

Oh !  what  a  loyo  must  Thine  have  been 
To  praise  in  view  of  such  a  scene, 
When  broken  bread  and  flowing  wine 
Portrayed  those  bitter  woes  of  Thine  I 


Q.  97.  What  is  required  to  the  worthy  receiving  of  the  Lord's 
supper  ? 

A.  It  is  required  of  them  that  would  worthily  partake  of  the 
Lord's  supper,  that  they  examine  themselves  of  their  knowledge 
to  discern  the  Lord's  body,0  of  their  faith  to  feed  upon  him,1?  of 

0  i  Cor.  xi.  28.  But  let  a  man  examine  himself,  and  so  let  him  eat  of  that 
bread,  and  drink  of  that  cup.  Ver.  29  :  For  he  that  eateth  and  drinketh 
unworthily,  eateth  and  drinketh  damnation  to  himself,  not  discerning  the  Lord's 
body. 

i'  2  Cor.  xiii.  5  :  Examine  yourselves,  whether  ye  be  in  the  faith  :  prove  your 
own  selves.  Know  ye  not  your  own  selves,  how  that  Jesus  Christ  is  in  you,  except 
ye  be  reprobates  ? 


THE   WORTHY   RECEIVING   OF   THE   LORD'S   SUPPER.  187 

their   repentance,^  love,r   and   new   obedience ; 8    lest    coming 
unworthily,  they  eat  and  drink  judgment  to  themselves.* 

i  i  Cor.  xi.  31  :  For  if  we  would  judge  ourselves,  we  should  not  be  judged. 

r  i  Cor  x.  16  :  The  communion  of  the  blood  of  Christ  .  .  .  the  communion  of 
the  body  of  Christ.  '  Ver.  17  :  For  we,  being  many,  are  one  bread,  and  one  body  : 
for  we  are  all  partakers  of  that  one  bread. 

8  i  Cor.  v.  7  :  Purge  out  therefore  the  old  leaven,  that  ye  may  be  a  new  lump, 
as  ye  are  unleavened.  Ver.  8  :  Therefore  let  us  keep  the  feast,  not  with  old 
leaven,  neither  with  the  leaven  of  malice  and  wickedness;  but  with  the  unleavened 
bread  of  sincerity  and  truth. 

*  i  Cor.  xi.  28,  29.     [See  in  letter  °.] 

It  is  required — By  Christ  and  by  His  Church. 

that  they  examine  themselves— "Look  and  behold  in  quhat  estate  your 
hart  is  in  with  God,  and  in  what  estate  your  conscience  is  with  your 
neighbour.  Others  can  nocht  try  you  so  narrowlie  as  ye  yourself  can  ;  na 
man  can  be  certain  of  the  estate  of  your  heart  and  condition  of  your  conscience, 
and  yit  ye  yourself  may  be  certain  of  it.  ...  Revolve  in  your  memories 
and  remember  gif  at  ony  time  it  pleased  the  Lord,  in  His  mercy,  to  turn  the 
darkness  of  your  mind  unto  light,  to  make  that  darkness  quhilk  was  in  you 
to  depart.  Examine,  I  say,  quhither  gif  this  darkness  of  the  nattirale  under 
standing  be  turned  to  light,  be  the  working  of  the  Spirit  or  not  :  gif  thou  art 
become  a  child  of  the  light,  of  the  day ;  gif  thou  art  become,  as  the  apostles 
say,  light  in  the  Lord  :  gif  the  Lord  has  at  ony  time  enlightened  the  eye  of 
the  mind,  and  made  thee  be  thine  owin  miserie  to  see  the  ugliness  of  thine 
owin  nature,  to  see  the  hainous  sins  in  the  quhilk  be  nature  thou  lyes  :  gif  lie 
has  granted  thee  ane  insight  of  thyself  in  some  measure  :  And,  upon  the  uther 
side,  if  He  has  granted  ane  outgett,  and  has  given  thee  ane  insight  of  the 
grace  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  gif  thou  have  gotten  ane  insight  of  the  riches  of 
the  grace  of  Christ :  Na  doubt,  the  Halie  Spirit  has  begun  a  good  work  in 
thee  !  "  (see  Bruce,  Fourt  and  Fift  Sermons}. 

"  Again,  being  so  prone  as  we  are  to  fawn  upon  ourselves,  and  to  be 
ignorant  as  much  as  may  be  of  our  own  deformities,  .without  the  feeling  sense 
whereof  we  are  most  wretched  ;  even  so  much  the  more,  because  not  knowing 
them  we  cannot  so  much  as  desire  to  have  them  taken  away  :  how  should  our 
festered  sores  be  cured,  but  that  God  hath  delivered  a  law  as  sharp  as  a  two- 
edged  sword,  piercing  the  closest  and  most  unsearchable  corners  of  the  heart, 
which  the  law  of  nature  can  hardly,  human  laws  by  no  means  possibly, 
reach  unto  ?  Hereby  we  know  even  secret  concupiscence  to  be  sin  :  and  are 
made  fearful  to  offend,  though  it  be  but  in  a  wandering  cogitation"  (Hooker). 

"Search  others  for  their  virtues,  and  thyself  for  thy  vices"  (Thomas 
Fuller). 

"No  man  is  fit  to  communicate,  who  is  not  fit  to  die"  (Jeremy  Taylor). 
(See  a  Kcmpis,  Book  iv.  chap,  vii.) 

knowledge  to  discern  the  Lord's  body — Discern  is  a  scriptural  word,  and 
means  in  this  connection,  as  always,  to  understand  aright,  to  discriminate,  to 
distinguish.  Now  to  discern  the  body  of  the  Lord  is  to  put  that  distinction 
and  esteem  upon  it  that  He  and  it  deserve  at  our  hands.  He  discerns  the 
body  of  his  Lord  who  asks  himself  and  answers  aright — Whose  body  is  that 
on  the  middle  cross  on  Calvary  ?  and  why  is  it  there  ?  Of  what  did  its  Divine 


1 88          THE    SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

Owner  speak  when  He  said,  My  body  is  broken  for  you?  In  what  sense 
and  to  what  result  is  that  body  present  in  the  Supper  ?  and  how  am  I  aiiglit 
to  become  incorporate  with  it  ?  To  look  at  our  Lord's  body  in  these  and  such 
like  ways  is  aright  to  discern  it.  "  Discern,  to  separate  or  distinguish  between 
the  sign  and  the  thing  signified  "  (note  in  English  Presbyterian  edition). 

of  their  faith  to  feed  upon  him— See  under  "eat  and  drink  judgment.5* 
"  No  faith,  no  covenant  ;  no  covenant,  no  seal ;  no  seal,  no  sacrament"  (Dr. 
Reynolds).  Faith  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  an  eye,  sometimes  as  a  foot, 
and  sometimes  as  a  hand.  Here  its  action  is  set  forth  as  that  of  the  mouth 
of  the  soul.  This  metaphor  of  eating  is  frequent  in  the  Old  Testament,  and 
the  great  discourse  in  the  sixth  of  John,  taken  along  with  the  ordinance  of 
the  Supper,  has  made  this  figure  very  familiar  to  the  Christian  mind  and 
heart.  Faith  is  there  a  feeding,  assimilating,  and  nourishing  faculty,  and 
Christ,  with  His  word,  and  work,  and  grace,  is  the  proper  and  peculiar  food 
of  faith.  They  who  worthily  communicate  feed  spiritually  on  Christ,  and  if 
they  examine  themselves  aright  they  will  see  that  they  do. 

of  their  repentance— See  Answer  87. 

love— See  Answer  42. 

new  obedience — See  Answer  87. 

lest  they  eat  and  drink  judgment— Professor  Cancllish  points  out  that  the 
Shorter  Catechism  is  here  more  correct  than  the  Authorized  Version  of  the 
New  Testament,  in  that  it  renders  the  original  by  judgment  rather  than  by 
damnation.  The  Revised  Version  follows  the  Catechism  in  translating 
judgment.  Dr.  Maclear,  commenting  on  Mark  xii.  40,  points  out  that  the 
words  in  I  Cor.  xi.  29-32  rendered  damnation,  discerning,  jitdged,  condemna 
tion,  are  all,  in  the  Greek,  parts  or  derivatives  of  one  and  the  same  original 
word  ;  and  refers  to  Wycliffe,  who  imitated  the  uniformity  of  the  Greek  in 
rendering  all  these  words  into  forms  of  the  same  English  word,  thus  :  "He 
that  etitli  and  drinketh  vnworthili,  etith  and  drinkith  doom  to  him,  not 
wisely  demyng  the  bodi  of  the  Lord.  .  .  .  And  if  we  demyden  wiseli 
us  silf  we  schulden  not  be  demyd,  but  while  we  be  demyd  of  the  Lord  we  ben 
chastised,  that  we  be  not  damp nyd  with  this  world."  The  richer  the  grace 
that  is  despised,  the  greater  the  sin  :  and  the  deeper  will  be  the  punishment 
of  those  despisers  who  perish  with  the  sin  of  unworthy  communicating  added 
to  all  their  other  sins.  The  greater  the  benefits  to  worthy  communicating, 
the  greater  the  guilt  to  those  who  despise  and  profane  both  word  and 
sacrament. 

And  to  part  with  Robert  Bruce' s  powerful  and  savoury  sermons  :  <!  Now, 
come  on  :  this  may  be  maid  mair  clear  be  a  similitude.  Ye  see  amonge 
worldly  princes  their  custome  is,  they  will  not  suffer  their  majesty  to  be 
interest  in  the  smallest  thing  that  they  love.  Quhere  can  be  a  smaller  thing 
that  concerns  the  majestic  of  a  prince  nor  a  seall,  for  the  substance  of  it  is  but 
wax?  Yit,  gif  thou  disdanfully  use  that  seall,  and  contemn  it,  and  stampe  it 
under  thy  feet,  thou  art  counted  as  if  thou  didst  put  hands  on  the  king,  and 
thou  wilt  be  handled  aefter  sic  way.  Meikle  mair,  gif  thou  come  as  a  sow  or 
a  dog  to  handle  the  seals  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  meikle  mair  may 
thou  be  compted  to  be  guiltie  of  the  body  and  blood.  .  .  .  Take  up,  therefor, 
yourselves  in  time  ;  take  your  pennieworths  of  it,  for  ye  wott  not  how  lang 
it  lasts.  Crave  a  mouth  to  receive,  and  take  this  food  while  ye  may  have  it, 


PRAYER.  189 

or  assuredly  the  time  will  come  quhen  ye  sail  cry  for  it,  and  sail  not  get  it : 
but  in  place  of  grace  and  mercie  sail  come  judgment,  vengeance,  and  the 
dispensation  of  wrath." 

USE. — By  far  the  best  book  on  self-examination  accessible  to  the  English 
reader  is  Jonathan  Edwards'  Treatise  Concerning  Religions  Affections. 
The  Third  Part,  showing  what  are  distinguishing  signs  of  truly  gracious 
and  holy  affections,  is  one  of  the  best  pieces  of  practical  divinity  ever 
written.  Discoursing  generally  of  assurance  in  his  introductory  remarks, 
Edwards  says  :  "  It  is  not  God's  design  that  men  should  obtain  assurance 
in  any  other  way  than  by  mortifying  corruption,  increasing  in  grace,  and 
obtaining  the  lively  exercises  of  it.  And  although  self-examination  be  a 
duty  of  great  use  and  importance,  and  by  no  means  to  be  neglected  ;  yet 
it  is  not  &&  principal  means  by  which  the  saints  do  get  satisfaction  of 
their  good  estate.  Assurance  is  not  to  be  obtained  so  much  by  self- 
examination  as  by  action.  .  .  .  Paul  obtained  assurance  of  winning  the 
prize  more  by  Tunning  than  by  considering.  The  swiftness  of  his  pace 
did  more  toward  his  assurance  of  a  conquest  than  the  strictness  of  his 
examination"  (Let  all  young  ministers  and  students  of  divinity  master 
Edwards.) 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Explain  Augustine's  famous  antithetical  saying :  At  the  first  supper  eleven  ato 
the  Lord  with  the  bread ;  the  twelfth  ate  the  bread  with  the  Lord. 

2.  Describe  the  case  of  those  of  whom  Calvin  speaks :  There  are  some  that  receive 
Christ  truly  in  the  Supper,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  receive  Him  unworthily. 

3.  Can  you   discern   Bengel's  meaning :  The   question   is  not   about  the  body  of 
Christ,  but  rather  about  the  body  of  the  Lord  Jesus  ? 

4.  See  chap.  vii.  Booh  tu.  of  a  Kempis. 


Q.  98.    What  is  prayer1} 

A.  Prayer  is  an  offering  up  of  our  desires  unto  God,"  for  things 
agreeable  to  his  will,T  in  the  name  of  Christ,w  with  confession  of 
our  sins,*  and  thankful  acknowledgment  of  his  mercies.y 

u  Ps.  Ixii.  8  :  Trust  in  him  at  all  times  ;  ye  people,  pour  out  your  heart  before 
him  :  God  is  a  refuge  for  us.  Selah. 

v  i  John  v.  14  :  And  this  is  the  confidence  that  we  have  in  him,  that,  if  we  ask 
any  thing  according  to  his  will,  he  hearcth  us. 

wjohnxvi.  23:  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the 
Father  in  my  name,  he  will  give  it  you. 

x  Ps.  xxxii.  5  :  I  acknowledged  my  sin  unto  thee,  and  mine  iniquity  have  I  not 
hid.  I  said,  I  will  confess  my  transgressions  unto  the  Lord  ;  and  thou  forgavest 
the  iniquity  of  my  sin.  Selah.  Dan.  ix.  4 :  And  I  prayed  unto  the  Lord  my 
God,  and  made  my  confession,  and  said,  O  Lord,  the  great  and  dreadful  God, 
keeping  the  covenant  and  mercy  to  them  that  love  him,  and  to  them  that  keep  his 
commandments. 

y  Phil.  iv.  6  :  In  every  thing  by  prayer  and  supplication,  with  thanksgiving,  let 
your  requests  be  made  known  unto  God. 


190          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

We  come  now  to  the  subject  of  Prayer,  the  third  and  last  of  the  three  great 
Christian  ordinances  enumerated  in  Answer  88.  As  will  be  seen  on  examina 
tion,  the  structure  of  the  Catechism  takes  a  new  departure  with  that  Question 
and  Answer.  And  in  it  we  are  taught  that  the  word,  sacraments,  and  prayer, 
are  Christ's  "  ordinary  means  whereby  He  communicateth  to  us  the  benefits  of 
redemption."  We  have  already  studied  the  Questions  connected  with  the 
word  read  and  preached,  and  we  have  just  finished  the  doctrine  of  the  sacra 
ments,  and  now  we  enter  on  the  last  of  the  three  means  of  grace  above 
enumerated.  And  according  to  the  uniform  and  careful  method  of  the 
Catechism,  a  definition  or  description  of  prayer  is  asked  for  and  supplied. 

Prayer  is  an  offering  up  of  our  desires  unto  God— All  prayer  presupposes 
need,  and  a  desire  to  possess  the  things  needed.  Such  desire  is  altogether 
indispensable  to  true  prayer.  And  in  many  passages  of  Scripture  a  true  desire 
is  represented  as  all  that  is  needed  to  make  prayer  acceptable  and  effectual. 
And  on  the  other  hand,  where  earnest  desire  is  absent,  nothing  will  make  up 
for  the  want  of  it.  God  answers  no  man's  prayer  when  his  heart  is  not 
engaged  in  his  supplication.  "  Every  good  and  holy  desire,  though  it  lack 
the  form,  hath  notwithstanding  in  itself  the  substance,  and  with  Him  the  force 
of  a  prayer,  who  regardeth  the  very  moanings,  groans,  and  sighs  of  the  heart  of 
man.  Petitionary  prayer  presupposeth  in  us  first  the  want  of  that  which  we 
pray  for  ;  secondly,  a  feeling  of  that  want ;  thirdly,  an  earnest  willingness  of 
mind  to  be  eased  therein  ;  and  fourthly,  a  declaration  of  our  desire  in  the 
sight  of  God"  (Hooker). 

"  But  if  for  any  wish  thoti  dar'st  not  pray, 
Then  pray  to  God  to  cast  that  wish  away." 

for  things  agreeable  to  his  will — We  ought  to  ask  nothing  in  prayer 
that  we  know  not  to  be  agreeable  to  the  will  of  God,  and  we  ought  to  use 
every  endeavour  to  find  out  what  is  agreeable  to  His  will ;  for  assuredly, 
neither  by  prayer,  nor  by  any  other  effort  of  ours,  shall  we  get  anything 
that  is  not  so  agreeable.  Before  we  pray,  we  must,  so  far  as  we  can,  learn 
His  will  about  the  things  we  desire,  and  restrain  or  put  forward  our  prayev 
accordingly.  And  we  have  God's  will  revealed  so  as  to  be  our  guide  in 
prayer  as  in  all  other  matters  of  faith  and  duty.  "  The  first  step  toward 
prayer,  therefore,  is  the  knowledge  of  the  promises  of  God,  which  are,  as  it 
were,  the  charter  to  go  by.  Further  than  these  revealed  purposes,  His  will  is 
an  impenetrable  mystery"  (Irving).  (See  Answers  2,  39,  and  99.)  Writers 
on  practical  religion  teach  us  that  there  are  some  things  we  may  and  ought  to 
ask  for  absohitcly,  and  other  things  we  must  ask  for  only  conditionally,  and 
they  are  able  to  illustrate  this  distinction  at  great  fulness  from  the  Scriptures. 

in  the  name  of  Christ  —  (See  Larger  Catechism,  Answers  180,  181.) 
Mediation  was  a  fundamental  principle  of  the  Mosaic  economy,  and  as  soon 
as  that  economy  "decayed  and  waxed  old,"  and  the  One  Mediator  between 
God  and  man  appeared,  that  divine  principle  began  to  display  itself  in  Him. 
Even  before  He  had  entered  into  the  Holiest  with  His  own  blood,  and  while 
as  yet  His  best  disciples  were  scarcely  able  to  hear  it,  He  declared  plainly 
His  own  unique  position  between  God  and  man  as  the  Son  in  the  house,  the 
way,  the  door,  the  alone  access.  And  in  our  day,  and  in  our  case,  prayer  in 
His  name,  when  offered  with  the  enlightened  understanding  and  the  believing 
heart,  is  just  the  believer's  recognition  and  acceptance  of  Christ  as  his  alone 
sacrifice  and  intercessor  before  God.  This  is  far  from  a  "bare  mentioning 


PRAYER.  IQI 

of  His  name,"  for  it  is  our  "drawing  of  our  encouragement  to  pray,  and  our 
boldness,  strength,  and  hope  of  acceptance  in  prayer  from  Christ  and  His 
mediation."  The  "name  of  Christ"  in  a  true  believer's  prayer  is  not  a 
written  word  or  an  uttered  sound ;  it  is  rather  our  richest  conception  and 
utterance  of  all  that  Scripture  teaches  us  of  the  divinity,  incarnation,  sacrifice, 
and  intercession  of  Him  we  call  Christ.  "  What  is  His  name,  and  what  is 
His  Son's  name,  if  thou  canst  tell  ? "  Who  is  the  Redeemer  of  God's  elect  ? 
(See  Answers  21-28.) 

To  the  clause,  "in  the  name  of  Christ,"  the  Larger  Catechism  adds,  "by 
the  help  of  His  Spirit,"  which  comfortable  addition  is  true  both  to  many 
scriptures  and  to  manifold  Christian  experience.  The  Larger  Catechism  is 
the  best  commentary  on  itself,  and  on  the  Shorter  Catechism  also,  and  it 
expands  and  illustrates  this  clause  in  its  own  admirable  and  scriptural  way. 
"The  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  the  intercessor  in  us,  and  who  searcheth  the  deep 
things  of  God,  doth  offer,  prompt,  and  suggest  to  us  in  our  prayer  those  very 
motives  that  are  in  God's  heart,  to  grant  the  thing  we  desire  of  Him,  so  as  it 
often  comes  to  pass,  that  a  poor  creature  is  carried  on  to  speak  God's  very 
heart  to  Himself,  and  then  God  cannot,  nor  doth  not  deny  "  (Goodwin).  For 
our  dependence  on  His  Holy  Spirit's  working  in  other  things,  see  Answers 
22,  24,  30,  31,  89,  91. 

with  confession  of  our  sins— It  is  impossible  that  a  sinner  should  truly 
draw  near  to  God  in  the  name  of  Christ  without  such  a  sense  of  his  corruption 
and  guilt  being  awakened  within  him  as  to  make  him  introduce  and  inter 
sperse  his  prayer  with  confession  of  sin  and  lamentation  on  account  of  it. 
Let  the  student  pass  his  mind  over  the  record  of  Scripture,  and  mark  how 
universal  and  how  acceptable  this  state  of  mind  was  in  God's  people.  There 
is  nothing  more  becoming  sinful  men  than  confession  and  contrition.  It  is 
the  very  "spot"  of  His  children. 

and  thankful  acknowledgment  of  his  mercies.  "We  are  to  pray  with 
an  awful  apprehension  of  the  majesty  of  God,  and  a  deep  sense  of  our  own 
unworthiness,  necessities,  and  sins ;  with  penitent,  thankful,  and  enlarged 
hearts  ;  with  understanding,  faith,  sincerity,  fervency,  love,  and  perseverance 
waiting  upon  Him  with  humble  submission  to  His  will."  "Prayer  and 
thanks  are  like  the  double  motion  of  the  lungs ;  the  air  that  is  sucked  iu  by 
prayer  is  breathed  out  again  by  thanks  "  (Old  writer). 

USES. — I.  Desire  aright,  and  then  seek  inflamed  desires. 

2.  "It  is  best  to  be  careful  in  prayer  not  to  put  up  those  petitions  of  which 
I  do  not  feel  a  sincere  desire ;  for  thereby  my  prayer  is  rendered  less 
sincere,   less  acceptable  to  God,  and  less  useful  to  myself"  (Jonathan 
Edwards'  Diary). 

3.  "Is  it  enough  to  make  prayer  acceptable  that  the  matter  is  agreeable  to 
God's  will  ?     No,  it  is  not ;  for  the  manner  as  well  as  the  matter  must  be 
so  too.     If  I  regard  iniquity  in  my  heart,  the  Lord  will  not  hear  me  " 
(Flavel's  Catechism}. 

4.  Never  let  Christ's  name  pass  in  a  prayer  with  a  "bare  mention,"  but 
seize  on  some  aspect  of  His  Person  or  work  suitable  to  the  matter  in 
hand.      Be  sure  there  is  something  somewhere  in  Christ's  fulness  to 
support  and  carry  with  God  every  right  petition.     Seeking  it  out  will  in 
course  of  time  make  you  wiser  than  all  your  teachers. 


192          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY, 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  In  tracing  out  the  structure  of  the  Catechism,  with  what  previous  Question  would 
you  connect  Question  98? 

2.  Explain    absolutely    and    conditionally    In    the    Notes,    and    give    scriptural 
illustrations. 

3.  In  the  name  of  Christ.     Suppose  you  read  this  all-important  Answer  for  the 
first  time,  and  had  no  means  of  religious  Information   beyond  the  Catechism,  to  what 
previous  Answers  would  you   return  to  get  light  on   the  inquiry,  Who  and  what  is 
Christ  ?   and  why  does  His  name  so  prevail  in  prayer  ? 

4.  Commit  and  be  reproved  toward  God  and  man  by  the  following  lines  ;— 

The  virtues  were  invited  once 

To  banquet  with  the  Lord  of  All; 
They  came,— the  great  ones  rather  grim, 

And  not  so  ple-jant  as  the  small. 

They  talked  and  chatted  o'er  the  meal, 
They  even  laughed  with  temp'rate  glee; 

And  each  one  knew  the  other  well, 
And  all  were  good  as  good  could  be. 

Benevolence  and  Gratitude 

Alone  of  all  seemed  strangers  yet ; 
They  stared  when  they  were  introduced,— 

On  earth  they  never  once  had  met. 

—  Academy,  No.  575. 


Q.  99.    What  rule  hath  God  given  for  our  direction  in  prayer? 

A.  The  whole  word  of  God  is  of  use  to  direct  us  in  prayer ; z 
but  the  special  rule  of  direction  is  that  form  of  prayer  which 
Christ  taught  his  disciples,  commonly  called  The  Lord's  Prayer* 

z  i  John  v.  14  :  And  this  is  the  confidence  that  we  have  in  him,  that,  if  we  ask 
anything  according  to  his  will,  he  heareth  us. 

a  Matt.  vi.  9-13  :  After  this  manner  therefore  pray  ye  :  Our  Father,  etc.  Com 
pared  with  Luke  xi.  2,  3,  4 :  And  he  said  unto  them,  When  ye  pray,  say,  Our 
Father,  etc. 

The  whole  word  of  God— It  is  a  most  interesting  and  instructive  study  to 
trace  how  one  psalm  or  prayer  is  incorporated  with  another,  and  how  the 
matter  and  language  of  prayer  thus  grow  as  Scripture  and  the  life  of  the 
Church  grow.  Our  Lord  Himself,  in  this  lesson  He  taught  His  disciples, 
only  gathers  into  a  short  and  memorable  form  certain  petitions  that  are 
scattered  up  and  down  the  whole  of  the  Old  Testament.  The  whole  word 
of  God  is  of  use  to  direct  us  in  prayer,  and  the  better  that  any  man  knows 
the  word  of  God,  the  less  will  he  need!  to  depend  on  any  special  rule  of 
direction.  "  Let  the  word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  richly." 

the  special  rule  of  direction — "How  is  the  Lord's  Prayer  to  be  used? 
The  Lord's  Prayer  is  not  only  for  direction,  as  a  pattern,  according  to  which 
we  are  to  make  other  prayers  ;  but  may  also  be  used  as  a  prayer,  so  that  it 
be  done  with  understanding,  faith,  reverence,  and  other  graces  necessary  to 


J93 

the  right  performance  of  the  duty  of  prayer."  The  student  of  Church  history 
will  trace  in  this  statement  an  echo  of  the  Puritan  contendings  against  the 
ahuse  of  liturgical  forms  in  public  worship. 

which  Christ  taught  his  disciples — "  One  of  His  disciples  said  unto  Him, 
Lord,  teach  us  to  pray,  as  John  also  taught  his  disciples.  And  He  said 
unto  them,  When  ye  pray,  say,  Our  Father,"  etc.  "The  disciples  of  John 
the  Baptist,  and  the  disciples  of  Christ,  waited  on  their  respective  masters  for 
instructions  how  to  pray.  It  was  in  vain  that  the  duty  of  repentance  was 
preached  to  the  one,  and  of  faith  to  the  other  ;  they  knew  the  truth,  but  they 
could  not  use  it.  So  different  a  thing  is  it  to  be  instructed  in  religion,  and  to 
have  so  mastered  it  in  practice  that  it  is  altogether  our  own "  (Newman, 
i-  257). 

commonly  called  The  Lord's  Prayer.  Commonly,  but  somewhat  improperly. 
This  is  properly  the  disciples'  prayer.  The  prayer  recorded  in  the  seventeenth 
of  John  is  with  more  propriety  called  THE  LORD'S  PRAYER.  (See  Robert 
Traill  on  The  Lord's  Prayert  p.  I.) 

USES. — i.   i  Cor.  xiv.  15. 

2.  "  Its  end  is  answered,  not  when  we  repeat  it  once  or  often,  but  when  we 
conform  the  feeling  and  expression  of  our  prayer  to  its  model  j  when  they 
have  the  same  fulness  of  meaning ;  the  same  sobriety  of  utterance,  the 
same  distinction  of  conceptions,  the  same  conformity  to  the  spirit  of  the 
Divine  revelations  "  (Edward  Irving  On  the  Lord's  Prayer]. 

3.  "It  is  a  lesson  for  children,  for  spiritual  minors,  for  Christians  in  the 
crude  stage  of  the  divine  life,  afflicted  with  confusion  of  mind,  dumbness, 
dejection,  unable  to  pray  for  want  of  clear  thought,  apt  words,  and  above 
all  of  faith  "  (Dr.  Bruce's  Training  of  the  Twelve,  chap.  vi.     See  the 
whole  admirable  passage). 


Q.  i  oo.    What  doth  the  preface  of  the  Lord's  prayer  teach  us  ? 

A.  The  preface  of  the  Lord's  prayer  (which  is,  Our  l?ather 
which  art  in  heaven  b)  teacheth  us  to  draw  near  to  God  with  all 
holy  reverence  and  confidence,  as  children  to  a  father,  able  and 
ready  to  help  us ; c  and  that  we  should  pray  with  and  for  others.d 

b  Matt.  vi.  9. 

c  Rom.  viii.  15  :  For  ye  have  not  received  the  spirit  of  bondage  again  to  fear ; 
but  ye  have  received  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry,  Abba,  Father.  Luke 
xi.  13  :  If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  children  ; 
how  much  more  shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask 
him  ? 

d  Acts  xii.  5  :  Peter  therefore  was  kept  in  prison  ;  but  prayer  was  made  without 
ceasing  of  the  church  unto  God  for  him.  i  Tim.  ii.  i  :  I  exhort  therefore,  that, 
first  of  all,  supplications,  prayers,  intercessions,  arid  giving  of  thanks,  be  made  for 
all  men  ;  Ver.  2  :  For  kings,  and  for  all  that  are  in  authority  :  that  we  may  lead  a 
quiet  and  peaceable  life  in  all  godliness  and  honesty. 

The  preface — The  Lord's  Prayer  consists  of  three  parts  :  a  preface,  certain 
petitions,  and  a  conclusion.  And  the  preface  is  : — 

N 


194          THE   SHORTER    CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

Our  Father  wliicli  art  in  heaven— "God  lovingly  inviteth  us,  in  this 
little  preface,  truly  to  believe  in  Him,  that  He  is  our  true  Father,  and  that  we 
are  truly  His  children,  so  that  full  of  confidence  we  may  more  boldly  call 
upon  His  name,  even  as  we  see  children  with  a  kind  of  confidence  ask  any 
thing  of  their  parents  "  (Luther's  Catechism}.  "  God  hath  not  taken  the  name 
of  a  Father,  nor  Christ  of  an  Elder  Brother  for  nought,  but  because  these 
names  import  more  nearly  than  any  other  the  nature  of  the  affection  which 
they  bear  us  "  (Edward  Irving  On  the  Lord's  Prayer}. 

"  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven  "  is  the  Christian  child's  first  prayer,  just 
as  "The  Lord's  my  Shepherd  "  is  his  first  psalm.  From  the  very  beginning 
of  the  Christian  Church  this  prayer  has  been  in  constant  use.  It  has  been 
offered  daily  among  the  disciples  of  Jesus  Christ  ever  since  that  fruitful  day 
when  one  of  the  twelve  came  to  Him,  saying,  "Lord,  teach  me  to  pray. 
But  though  it  was  first  taught  in  the  childhood  of  the  Church,  and  is  still 
taught  to  the  children  of  every  Christian  home,  it  is  not  for  all  that  to  be  taken 
as  only  a  child's  prayer.  It  is  true  the  shortest  memory  may  retain  it,  and 
the  busiest  life  may  utter  it ;  the  weakest  understanding  may  sufficiently  grasp 
it,  and  the  most  childlike  faith  may  feel  at  home  in  it ;  but  while  all  that  is 
true,  yet  men  of  God  who  have  their  senses  best  exercised  among  divine  things 
will  feel  that  this  prayer  grows  with  their  growing  experience,  and  gradually 
gathers  unto  itself  the  whole  fulness  of  the  Word  of  God  and  the  need  of 
man. 

God  is  named  Father  in  several  senses  in  the  Bible.  He  is  sometimes 
called  Father  simply  as  the  Creator  of  all  things.  Again,  He  is  called  the 
Father  of  mankind,  because  they  were  made  in  His  Image,  and  made  to  be 
His  spiritual  children.  But  in  a  higher  sense  still  He  is  called  the  Father  of 
regenerate  sons,  because  by  their  new  birth,  union  to  Christ,  and  adoption 
into  His  family,  they  have  become  in  more  than  a  metaphorical  sense  the 
sons  of  God,  and  He  their  Father.  ' '  They  have  been  received  into  the 
number,  and  have  a  right  to  all  the  privileges,  of  the  sons  of  God."  (See 
Answer  34. )  But  all  this  leaves  unmentioned  the  real  and  true  sense,  the 
eternal  and  divine  sense,  in  which  God  is  the  Father  of  His  Only  Begotten 
Son.  (For  this  see  Answers  6  and  21.) 

At  every  step  of  our  exposition  we  shall  have  occasion  to  remark  on  the 
mistake  of  calling  this  series  of  petitions  the  Lord's  Prayer.  The  very  preface 
compels  us  to  distinguish  between  the  Paternity  of  the  Father  toward  Jesus 
Christ  and  toward  us.  And  all  our  Lord's  utterances  in  this  direction  observe 
this  distinction.  He  never  once  says,  "Our  Father,'5  including  Himself  with 
us  as  a  son.  He  says,  "  Father,"  "  Holy  Father,"  "  Righteous  Father,"  and 
' ' My  Father ;"  but  never  Our  Father.  Once  He  says,  "My  Father  and  your 
Father,"  but  He  distinguishes  in  so  saying.  "  God  is  the  Father  of  Him  and 
of  us,  but  not  of  us  as  of  Him  "  (Pearson).  (See  Dr.  Candlish's  Fatherhood  of 
God,  Lect.  ii.)  Heaven  is  the  dwelling-place  of  God  ;  it  is  our  Father's  house. 
And  though  it  is  not  to  be  limited  and  localized  as  a  place  in  our  most  spiritual 
conceptions,  yet  it  is  right  and  necessary  for  us  to  think  of  heaven  as  above  us. 
Thus  we  read  that  Jesus  Himself,  when  He  prayed,  "lifted  up  His  eyes  to 
heaven."  Heaven  is  not  among  or  above  the  stars;  it  is  high  above  us  as  God 
is  high  above  man;  and  as  good  is  above  evil,  and  as  blessedness  is  above  con 
demnation  and  misery.  There  is  a  spiritual  world  as  well  as  a  material ;  and 
there  is  a  spiritual  geometry,  with  its  various  directions,  as  well  as  a  material. 
"But  as  it  is  only  half  of  our  reliance  that  is  founded  on  the  goodness  of  God, 
in  the  next  clause,  which  art  in  heaven,  He  gives  us  a  lofty  idea  of  the  power 


OUR   FATHER   WHICH   ART   IN    HEAVEN.  195 

of  God"  (Calvin).      (See  Edward   Irving's   fine   discourses   on  the   Lord's 
Prayer  in  the  third  volume  of  his  collected  Works.) 

teacheth  us  to  draw  near  to  God  —  Before  we  begin  to  pray  we  are 
to  think  of  ourselves  as  at  a  greater  distance  from  God  than  we  ought  to 
be,  need  be,  and  now  desire  to  be.  Prayer  is  a  drawing  near  to  God.  No 
utterance  of  Augustine's  has  been  oftener  quoted  by  commentators  and  devo 
tional  writers  than  this  :  "  Oh  for  a  mountain  to  pray  on,  thou  criest,  high 
and  inaccessible,  that  I  may  be  nearer  to  God,  and  God  may  hear  me  better, 
for  He  dwelleth  on  high.  Yes,  God  dwelleth  on  high,  but  He  hath  respect 
unto  the  humble  !  .  .  .  Wouldst  thou  pray  in  His  temple,  pray  in  thyself ; 
but  first  do  thou  become  the  temple  of  God." 

with  all  holy  reverence — Reverence  is  a.  filial  affection  ;  it  is  composed  ot 
equal  parts  of  love  and  fear.  "  Holy  and  reverend  is  His  name.  ...  let  us 
have  grace  whereby  we  may  serve  God  acceptably  with  reverence  and  godly 
fear."  "  Let  the  holiest  and  best  thing  we  do  be  considered.  We  are  never 
better  affected  unto  God  than  when  we  pray  ;  yet,  when  we  pray,  how  are  our 
affections  many  times  distracted  !  How  little  reverence  do  we  show  to  the 
grand  majesty  of  that  God  to  whom  we  speak  !  How  little  remorse  of  our 
own  miseries  !  How  little  taste  of  the  sweet  influence  of  His  tender  mercy 
do  we  feel !  "  (Hooker). 

and  confidence — Confidence  is  just  another  form  of  the  word  faith, — con 
fidence  is  childlike  trust.  The  Larger  Catechism,  Answer  189,  translates  it 
"childlike  dispositions."  "The  Lord  shall  be  thy  confidence,  and  shall 
keep  thy  foot  from  being  taken  "  (Prov.  iii.  26). 

"  Without  the  constant  exercise  of  faith  there  is  no  life  in  worship,  nor 
satisfaction  to  be  obtained  by  it.  Men  must  therefore  have  something  in  it, 
or  accompanying  it,  which  may  entertain  their  minds,  and  engage  their  affec 
tions  unto  it.  Hereon  were  invented  forms  of  prayer  in  great  diversity,  with 
continual  diversions  and  avocations  of  the  mind,  because  it  cannot  abide  in  the 
pursuit  of  anything  spiritual  without  the  exercise  of  faith.  Hereunto  are 
added  outward  ceremonies  of  vestures,  postures,  and  gestures  of  veneration 
unto  the  same  end.  There  is  no  other  design  in  them  all  but  to  entertain  the 
mind  and  affections  with  some  complacency  and  satisfaction  in  outward  wor 
ship  upon  the  loss  or  want  of  that  exercise  of  faith  which  is  the  soul  and  life 
of  it  in  believers"  (Owen). 

able  and  ready  to  help  us — Able,  because  All-Mighty  ;  ready,  because 
waiting  to  be  gracious.  "All  things  are  ready."  "Thou  art  a  God  ready 
to  pardon."  "Thou,  Lord,  art  good,  and  ready  to  forgive."  "The  water 
man  in  the  boat,  who  with  his  hook  takes  hold  of  the  shore,  doth  not  thereby 
pull  the  shore  to  the  boat,  but  the  boat  to  the  shore.  So  in  prayer  we  do  not 
draw  the  mercy  to  ourselves,  but  ourselves  to  the  mercy"  (Matthew  Henry). 
The  shore  is  reculy  for  the  boatman's  hook. 

' '  Socrates.  Do  you  know  how  to  escape  out  of  a  state  which  I  do  not  even 
like  to  name  ? 

"  Alcibiades.  Yes,  I  do.  Soc.  How?  AL  By  your  help,  Socrates. 
Soc.  That  is  not  well  said,  Alcibiades.  AL  What  ought  I  to  have  said  ? 
Soc.  By  the  help  of  God  "  (Plato,  Alcib.}. 

and  that  we  should  pray  with  and  for  others.  "  Great  stress  is  laid  on 
the  injunction  of  united  prayer.  Private  devotion  is  essential  to  the  spiritual 


196          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH    A   COMMENTARY. 

life — without  it  there  is  no  life.  But  it  cannot  replace  united  prayer.  Solitary 
prayer  is  feeble  in  comparison  with  that  which  rises  before  the  throne,  echoed 
by  the  hearts  of  hundreds,  and  strengthened  by  the  feeling  that  other  aspira 
tions  are  mingling  with  our  own.  .  .  .  The  value  and  power  of  public  prayer 
seems  chiefly  to  depend  on  that  mysterious  affection  of  our  nature — sym 
pathy  "  (Robertson).  And  for  others.  "  For  whom  are  we  to  pray  ?  We  are 
to  pray  for  the  whole  Church  of  Christ  upon  earth  ;  for  magistrates  and 
ministers  ;  for  ourselves,  our  brethren,  yea,  our  enemies  ;  and  for  all  sorts  of 
men  living,  or  that  shall  live  hereafter"  (Larger  Catechism).  "The  two 
blind  men  did  not  each  of  them  say  for  himself,  '  Have  mercy  on  me  ; '  but 
both  for  one  another,  '  Have  mercy  on  us'"  (Matthew  Henry). 

USES. — I.  "As  to  the  Lord's  Prayer,  although  it  be  an  easy  thing  to  say 
'  Our  Father '  with  the  mouth,  yet  there  are  very  few  that  can,  in  the 
spirit,  say  the  two  first  words  in  that  prayer ;  that  is,  can  call  God 
their  Father,  as  knowing  what  it  is  to  be  born  again,  and  as  having 
experienced  that  they  are  begotten  of  the  Spirit  of  God  "  (Bunyan 
before  the  Justices). 

2.  "With  all  holy  reverence."     "So  it  was  concluded,  since  Christiana 
was  the  eldest,  that  she  should  knock  for  entrance,  and  that  she  should 
speak  to  him  that  did  open  for  the  rest." 

3.  Calvin  commenting  on  Hezekiah  turning  his  face  to  the  wall  in  prayer, 
says  :  "  The  mere  attitude,  indeed,  is  immaterial  ;  but  it  is  of  very  great 
importance  to  us,  that  nothing  should  be  presented  to  our  eyes  or  senses 
that  would  drag  us  away  from  prayer,  that  we  may  pour  out  our  desires 
more  freely  before  God.     We  are  naturally  unsteady,  and  easily  drawn 
aside,  and  therefore  we  cannot  be  too  diligent  in  fixing  our  attention." 
This  is   the  rationale  of  the  universal  practice  of  shutting  the  eyes  in 
prayer.     We  do  so  that  "nothing  may  be  presented  to  our  eyes  that 
would  drag  us  away  from  prayer." 

4.  "  What  is  the  last  inference  from  hence?    That  seeing  believers  have  a 
Father  in  heaven,  they  should  never  fear  wants  while  they  live,  nor  be 
afraid  to  die,  since  death  brings  them  to  heaven,  their  Father's  house  " 
(Flavel). 

QUESTIONS. 

7.  Explain  Bengel'g  words:  The  whole  eflect  of  prayer  is  supernatural,  and  so 
far,  miraculous. 

2.  For  others.     Explain  Chilcot's  subscription  to  the  preface  of  his  booh,  On  Evil 
Thoughts :  Your  daily  orator  at  the  throne  of  grace. 

3.  Commit  to  memory  Isaac  Watts'  hymn:— 

Great  God!  and  wilt  Thou  condescend 
To  be  my  Father  and  my  Friend  ? 


Q.  ioi.    What  do  we  pray  for  in  the  first  petition1} 
A.  In  the  first  petition  (which  is.  Hallowed  be  thy  name*}  we 
pray,  That  God  would  enable  us  and  others  to  glorify  him  in  all 

e  Matt.  vi.  9. 


HALLOWED   BE   THY   NAME.  197 

that  whereby  he  maketh  himself  known ; f  and  that  he  would 
dispose  all  things  to  his  own  glory.? 

f  Ps.  Ixvii.  2 :  That  thy  way  may  be  known  upon  earth,  thy  saving  health  among 
all  nations.  Ver.  3  :  Let  the  people  praise  thee,  O  God  ;  let  all  the  people  praise 
thee. 

s  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  throughout. 

Hallowed  be  thy  name — We  have  already  had  this  word  hallow  before  us  in 
the  Fourth  Commandment.  And  it  bears  the  same  meaning  when  it  is  applied 
to  the  name  of  God  as  when  it  is  attached  to  the  day  of  God.  In  this  petition 
we  pray  that  the  name  of  God  may  be  reverenced  and  sanctified,  praised  and 
glorified  by  all  men,  and  especially  by  those  who  are  His  children  in  Christ. 
In  his  excellent  little  article  on  Sanctification,  Cruden  says  that  we  may  the 
better  see  what  is  meant  by  hallowing  God's  name,  by  looking  at  what  is 
opposite  to  it ;  by  considering  what  irreverence  and  profanity,  vain  swearing 
and  blasphemy  are.  We  hallow  God's  name  when  we  feel  a  holy  fear, 
reverence,  and  adoration  toward  Him,  and  toward  it  when  we  read  it,  or 
hear  it,  or  ourselves  speak  it.  "  Holy  and  reverend  is  His  name."  Cruden 's 
method  of  seeking  a  clearer  sense  of  "  hallowed  "  by  considering  its  opposite 
is  admirably  illustrated  in  what  Frederick  Robertson  says  about  France  : 
"  A  nation  may  reach  the  state  in  which  the  Eternal  Name  can  be  used  to 
point  a  sentence,  or  adorn  a  familiar  conversation,  and  no  longer  shock  the 
ear  with  the  sound  of  blasphemy.  .  .  .  For  example,  in  a  foreign  language, 
the  language  of  a  light  and  irreligious  people,  the  Eternal  Name  can  be  used 
as  a  light  expletive  and  conversational  ejaculation,  and  not  shock  any  religious 
sensibility.  You  could  not  do  that  in  English.  It  would  sound  like  blas 
phemy  to  say,  in  light  talk,  My  God  !  or,  Good  God  !  Your  flesh  would 
creep  at  hearing  it.  ...  No  marvel  we  are  taught  to  pray,  '  Hallowed  be 
Thy  name.' " 

thy  name  ...  all  that  whereby  he  maketh  himself  known — See  under 
the  Third  Commandment.  A  name  is  that  word,  that  written  sign  or  spoken 
sound,  by  which  any  person  or  thing  is  known.  But  from  this  elementary 
sense  of  the  word,  it  rises  to  mean,  as  in  the  text,  all  whereby  God  maketh 
Himself  known.  As  Calvin  says  :  "God's  name  is  not  made  up  of  letters 
and  syllables."  And  indeed,  our  own  names  are  more  than  a  matter  of  letters 
and  syllables,  spoken  sounds,  or  written  signs.  Our  name  is  ourself,  our 
fame,  our  worth,  our  character.  We  have  a  good  or  an  evil  name.  And 
this  principle  of  nomenclature  applies  not  less  but  more  to  the  name  of  God. 
His  name  is  all  that  whereby  He  maketh  Himself  known.  The  name  of  God, 
accordingly,  in  this  petition,  embraces  not  His  Bible  names  and  attributes 
only,  but  also  every  person,  providence,  ordinance,  institution,  rite,  observance, 
• — everything  in  nature  and  in  grace  whereby  God  speaketh  to  us  and  mani- 
fcsteth  Himself.  And  in  offering  the  petition,  "Hallowed  be  Thy  name,"  the 
petitioner  asks  that  the  grace  of  reverence  and  godly  fear  should  be  implanted 
in  all  men's  hearts  and  his  own.  He  asks  to  be  protected  from  a  profane  and 
irreverent  mind.  For  a  profane  mind  is  the  mind  of  a  man  who  sees  God  in 
nothing.  It  is  a  mind  without  reverence,  without  fear,  without  humility, 
without  a  sense  of  sin  and  guilt,  and,  consequently,  without  any  sense  of 
God's  existence  or  nearness  either  in  grace  or  judgment.  A  profane  mind  is 
a  hard,  secular,  indevout.  irreligious  mind  ;  and  in  this  prayer,  he  who  offers 


198          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

it  aright  asks  to  be  saved  from  the  dominion  of  such  an  unblest  state  of 
mind. 

and  that  he  would  dispose  all  things  to  his  own  glory.  "  But  though  the 
universal  cause  made  all  things  for  the  benefit  of  some  creatures  framed  by 
Him,  yet  hath  He  made  them  ultimately  for  Himself,  and  God  is  as  universally 
the  final  as  the  efficient  cause  of  His  own  operations  "  (Pearson). 

"  '  Hallowed  be  Thy  name '  is  the  top  petition  in  that  gospel  prayer  which 
Christ  taught  us.  ...  In  '  Hallowed  be  Thy  name  '  the  soul  desires  that  itself 
and  all  others  may  give  glory  to  God  for  all  that  is  due  to  His  name  every  way, 
and  principally  for  what  His  name  is.  ...  Some  strains  of  these  are  attain 
able  in  this  world"  (Goodwin).  (See  under  Question  I.) 

USES. — I.  "The  necessity  of  presenting  this  first  petition  bespeaks  our 
great  disgrace "  (Calvin).  "It  ought  to  be  noted,  that  when  we  pray 
that  God  would  enable  us  and  others  to  glorify  Him,  we  impliedly  confess 
that  we  are  unable  to  do  it  without  His  gracious  assistance.  The  utter 
impotence  of  fallen  man,  if  left  to  himself,  for  any  good  thought,  word, 
or  work, -is  a  truth  most  clearly  taught  in  the  oracles  of  inspiration" 
(Green). 

2.  When  we  pray  that  God's  name  may  be  hallowed,  we  thereby  promise 
that  we  shall,  by  God's  help,  so  hallow  it  ourselves.  Let  us  with  a 
purpose  set  this  great  duty  before  ourselves,  especially  in  all  acts  of 
worship,  public  or  private.  Worship  has  been  largely  instituted  to 
create  and  develop  and  discipline  this  grace  among  God's  children.  Let 
us  therefore  educate  ourselves  into  the  habit  of  never  hearing  the 
Divine  Name  uttered  in  Scripture  or  psalm  or  prayer  without  lifting 
up  our  hearts  to  Him  whose  name  it  is.  Let  us  set  the  Lord  always 
before  us. 

QUESTION. 

Explain  Calvin's  words :  The  necessity  of  presenting  this  petition  tespeaks  our 
great  disgrace. 


Q.  102.    What  do  we  pray  for  in  the  second  petition  ? 

A.  In  the  second  petition  (which  is,  Thy  kingdom  come^)  we 
pray,  That  Satan's  kingdom  may  be  destroyed;'  and  that  the 
kingdom  of  grace  may  be  advanced,^  ourselves  and  others  brought 

h  Matt.  vi.  10. 

1  Ps.  Ixviii.  i  :  Let  God  arise,  let  his  enemies  be  scattered  :  let  them  also  that 
hate  him  flee  before  him.  Ver.  18  :  Thou  hast  ascended  on  high,  thou  hast  led 
captivity  captive. 

J  Rev.  xii.  10  :  And  I  heard  a  loud  voice  saying  in  heaven,  Now  is  come  salva 
tion,  and  strength,  and  the  kingdom  of  our  God,  and  the  power  of  his  Christ :  for 
the  accuser  of  our  brethren  is  cast  down,  which  accused  them  before  our  God 
day  and  night.  Ver.  n  :  And  they  overcame  him  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb, 
and  by  the  word  of  their  testimony ;  and  they  loved  not  their  lives  unto  the 
death. 


THY    KINGDOM   COME.  199 

into  it,  and  kept  in  it ; k  and  that  the  kingdom  of  glory  may  be 

hastened.1 

k  2  Thess.  iii.  i :  Finally,  brethren,  pray  for  us,  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  may 
have  free  course,  and  be  glorified,  even  as  it  is  with  you.  Rom.  x.  i :  Brethren, 
my  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  for  Israel  is,  that  they  might  be  saved. 
John  xvii.  9  :  I  pray  for  them  :  I  pray  not  for  the  world,  but  for  them  which  thou 
hast  given  me  ;  for  they  are  thine.  Ver.  20  :  Neither  pray  I  for  these  alone,  but 
for  them  also  which  shall  believe  on  me  through  their  word. 

1  Rev.  xxii.  20 :  He  which  testifieth  these  things  saith,  Surely  I  come  quickly : 
Amen.  Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus. 

Thy  kingdom  come — It  is  a  common  saying  that  experience  is  the  best 
schoolmaster.  And  that  proverb  is  proved  true  even  in  the  present  instance, 
where  the  scholars  are  inquiring  disciples,  and  the  schoolmaster  is  the  Truth 
Himself.  For  there  was  no  lesson  among  all  the  lessons  that  were  set  the 
disciples  to  learn  that  they  approached  with  a  slower  heart  and  a  more  shut 
understanding  than  just  this  very  matter  of  the  coming  of  the  kingdom  ol 
God.  The  kingdom  of  David  was  the  first  stage  in  the  development  and 
manifestation  of  the  kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth.  And  in  spite  of  all  their 
Master  could  say  and  do,  this  exhausted  and  abolished  sense  was  still  the 
sense  in  which  the  disciples  insisted  in  offering  their  daily  prayer  :  "  Our 
Father  which  art  in  heaven.  .  .  .  Let  the  domination  of  Csesar  be  broken, 
and  let  the  ruined  kingdom  of  David  be  restored."  But  experience  taught 
even  those  slow-hearted  disciples  how  great  a  prayer  they  had  all  unknown 
to  themselves  been  uttering  when  they  said,  "Thy  kingdom  come"  (Rom. 
viii. :  26,  27).  "No  idea  comes  so  markedly  into  the  foreground  in  the 
teaching  of  our  Lord,  according  to  the  first  three  Gospels,  as  that  of  the 
kingdom  of  God  or  kingdom  of  heaven,  which  had  been  of  old  foretold  by 
the  prophets,  and  was  expected  by  the  contemporaries  of  Jesus.  The  gospel 
which  He  proclaims  is  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom,  and  the  kingdom  itself  is 
a  religious-moral  institution,  which — boundless  in  extent,  and  everlasting  in 
duration,  in  its  design  to  unite,  sanctify,  and  save  humanity — embraces  heaven 
and  earth  "  (Oosterzee).  (See  Professor  Lindsay's  Mark,  p.  63.) 

' '  The  kingdom  of  God  among  men  is  nothing  else  than  a  restoration  to 
a  happy  life ;  or,  in  other  words,  it  is  true  and  everlasting  happiness  " 
(Calvin). 

we  pray  that  Satan's  kingdom  may  be  destroyed — "His  great  com 
petitor,  Christ,  acknowledged!  Satan  to  have  a  kingdom  (Matt.  xii.  26).  Yen, 
and  he  had  the  start  with  his  kingdom  in  this  world  before  Christ  came  into  it" 
(Goodwin).  "  But,  methinks,  I  see  by  this,  that  Satan  will  use  any  means  to 
keep  the  soul  from  Christ ;  he  loveth  not  an  awakened  frame  of  spirit : 
security,  blindness,  darkness,  and  error  is  the  very  kingdom  and  habitation 
of  the  wicked  one"  (Grace  Abounding,  162).  The  various  steps  in  the 
destruction  of  Satan's  kingdom  in  the  soul  are  excellently  set  forth  in  Answers 
31,  35,  and  36. 

The  kingdom  of  grace  advanced— Paul  speaks  of  the  kingdom  of  God 
as  a  reign  of  grace,  and  the  Catechism  here  follows  his  example.  The 
kingdom  of  grace  is  advanced  with  the  conversion  of  every  sinner  and  the 
sanctification  of  every  believer,  and  with  the  spread  of  the  gospel  in  heathen 
lands.  This  clause  is  fully  expanded  in  the  Larger  Catechism. 


200          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM    WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

ourselves  and  others  brought  into  it— We  are  brought  into  this  kingdom 
by  being  born  again  and  effectually  called.  That  was  a  most  startling 
utterance  that  Nicodemus,  a  ruler  of  the  Jews,  a  prince  of  the  house  of  David, 
heard  from  the  lips  of  David's  son  :  ' '  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot 
see  the  kingdom  of  God."  For  this  is  as  much  as  to  say,  No  antiquity 
or  nobility  of  descent,  no  amount  of  personal  worth,  no  sacramental  sealing, 
no  ecclesiastical  rank  or  office,  no  attainments  in  sacred  learning,  and  no 
fulfilment  of  sacred  service, — nothing  that  any  man  can  of  himself  be  or  do 
will  admit  him  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  It  is  only  what  God  does  for 
him,  and  in  him,  that  capacitates  and  enfranchises  any  man  as  a  citizen  of 
the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Art  thou  a  master  of  Israel,  and  knowest  not  these 
things  ? 

and  kept  in  it— "  Holy  Father,  keep  through  Thine  own  name  those  whom 
Thou  hast  given  me.  .  .  .  While  I  was  with  them  in  the  world,  I  kept  them 
in  Thy  name,  and  none  of  them  is  lost.  ...  I  pray  not  that  Thou  shouldest 
take  them  out  of  the  world,  but  that  Thou  shouldest  keep  them  from  the 
evil  "  (Our  Lord's  Prayer). 

"Who  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation,  ready  to 
be  revealed  in  the  last  time"  (Peter).  "I  know  whom  I  have  believed, 
and  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed 
to  Him  against  that  day"  (Paul). 

and  that  the  kingdom  of  glory  may  be  hastened.  This  is  the  prayer 
of  those  who  "look  for  that  blessed  hope,  and  the  glorious  appearing  of 
the  great  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  They  who  offer  this  prayer 
with  the  spirit  and  with  the  understanding  also  know  as  they  offer  it  that  God 
hath  appointed  the  day  when  that  glory  shall  dawn,  and  they  know  that 
neither  prayer  nor  effort  will  literally  hasten  it.  But  they  pray  in  holy  im 
patience  because  they  are  { '  looking  for  and  hasting  unto  the  coming  of  the  day 
of  God."  "  He  which  testifieth  these  things  saith,  Surely  I  come  quickly. 
Amen.  Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus." 

USES. — i.  There  must  be  many  things  in  the  constitution  and  administra 
tion  of  such  a  kingdom  that  the  subjects  of  it  cannot  comprehend. 
There  must  be  many  counsels  between  the  Father  and  the  Son  that  we 
cannot  fathom.  But  it  is  our  loyalty  and  no  small  part  of  our  obedience 
to  believe  that  what  we  know  not  now  we  shall  know  hereafter.  And 
in  every  dispensation  of  His  rule  the  disciples  and  subjects  of  Jesus 
Christ  can  quiet  and  comfort  their  hearts,  saying,  He  is  our  Lawgiver, 
He  is  our  King,  and  He  will  save  us. 

2.  ' '  Every  man  falls  either  under  the  kingdom  of  Christ  or  under  the 
kingdom  of  Satan  ;  and  we  ourselves  do  this  hour,  this  moment,  actually 
stand  members  either  of  the  one  or  of  the  other  ;  there  is  not  a  third 
kingdom,  as  there  is  not  a  third  place  to  go  to  "  (Goodwin). 

3.  It  is  the  King's  command,  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God."     Let 
then  the  young  seek  it  first,  as  Solomon  sought  first,  and  before  all  else, 
a  wise  and  an  understanding  heart.     Let  all,  old  and  young,  seek  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  as  the  five  virgins  in  the  parable  of  the  kingdom 
sought  for  the  oil ;  only,   let  us  seek  it  more  wisely  and  earlier  than 
they.    And  lest  we  awake  to  seek  it  too  late,  let  us  arise  and  seek  it  now. 
Now,  while  as  yet  it  is  said  by  the  King  Himself,  Knock,  and  it  shall 
be  opened  unto  you. 


THY   WILL    BE    DONE.  2OI 

4.  "I  had  great  longings  for  the  advancement  of  Christ's  kingdom  in  the 
world  ;  and  my  secret  prayers  used  to  be  in  great  part  taken  up  with  it. 
If  I  heard  the  least  hint  of  anything  that  happened  in  any  part  of  the 
world,  that  appeared,  in  some  respect  or  other,  to  have  a  favourable 
aspect  on  the  interests  of  Christ's  kingdom,  my  soul  eagerly  catched  at 
it,  and  it  would  much  animate  and  refresh  me.  I  used  to  be  eager  to 
read  public  news-letters  mainly  for  that  end,  to  see  if  I  could  not  find 
some  news  favourable  to  the  interest  of  religion  in  the  world  "  (Jonathan 
Edwards'  Personal  Narrative  of  his  Youth], 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Derive  Theocracy  and  Christendom. 

2.  Derive,  fill  up,  and  explain  the  saying :  There  are  two  kings  and  two  kingdoms 
in  Scotland. 

3.  Collect  Scriptures  in  which  Satan  is  spoken  of  as  a  king. 

4.  In  Dr.  Hodge's  section  on  the  Nature  of  Christ's  Kingdom,   he  says  that  it  is 
spiritual,  Catholic,  absolute,  temporary.     Explain  these  positions,  and  prove  them 
from  Scripture. 


Q.  103.    What  do  we  pray  for  in  the  third  petition  ? 

A.  In  the  third  petition  (which  is,  Thy  will  be  done  in  earth^ 
as  it  is  in  heaven  m)  we  pray,  That  God,  by  his  grace,  would  make 
us  able  and  willing  to  know,  obey,  and  submit  to  his  will  in  all 
things,"  as  the  angels  do  in  heaven.0 

m  Matt.  vi.  10. 

n  Ps.  Ixvii.  throughout.  Ps.  cxix.  36 :  Incline  my  heart  unto  thy  testimonies,  and 
not  to  covetousness.  Matt.  xxvi.  39  :  And  he  went  a  little  farther,  and  fell  on  his 
face,  and  prayed,  saying,  O  my  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me  : 
nevertheless,  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt.  2  Sam.  xv.  25 :  And  the  king  said 
unto  Zadok,  Carry  back  the  ark  of  God  into  the  city  ;  if  I  shall  find  favour  in  the 
eyes  of  the  Lord,  he  will  bring  me  again,  and  shew  me  both  it  and  his  habitation. 
Job  i.  21  :  And  (Job)  said,  Naked  came  I  out  of  my  mother's  womb,  and  naked 
shall  I  return  thither :  the  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away  ;  blessed  be 
the  name  of  the  Lord. 

0  Ps.  ciii.  20 :  Bless  the  Lord,  ye  his  angels,  that  excel  in  strength,  that  do  his 
commandments,  hearkening  unto  the  voice  of  his  word.  Ver.  21 :  Bless  ye  the 
Lord,  all  ye  his  hosts  ;  ye  ministers  of  his,  that  do  his  pleasure. 

Thy  will  be  done — Connecting  the  previous  Question  with  the  present, 
Calvin  says,  "The  most  important  part  of  God's  kingdom  lies  in  His  will 
being  done."  Divines  have  drawn  out  the  Scripture  doctrine  of  the  Divine 
Will  under  such  heads  as  His  decretive  and  preceptive,  absolute  and  con 
ditional  will.  The  text  deals  with  God's  preceptive  will,  or,  as  it  has  already 
been  termed  in  the  Catechism,  His  "  revealed  will." 

by  his  grace — Larger  Catechism,  "by  His  Spirit."  (See  also  Answer  20, 
Shorter  Catechism.) 

would  make  us  able  and  willing  to  know,  obey,  and  submit  to  his  will 
— God's  will  is  good  as  God  Himself  is  good,  and  He  desires  and  commands 
us  to  imitate  Him  in  our  volitions  as  well  as  our  actions.  But  a  corruption 


202          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A    COMMENTARY. 

and  curse  have  fallen  upon  us,  such  that  we  naturally  and  necessarily  will  and 
wish  that  which  is  evil.  We  cannot  help  it.  We  may  struggle  against  it, 
but  we  struggle  in  vain.  It  is  the  cross  of  our  inner  life  that  our  will  is  so 
naturally,  spontaneously,  and  unconquerably  selfish  and  proud,  inhumane  and 
ungodly.  It  fills  us  with  guilt  and  bondage  ;  it  wrings  from  our  hearts 
groanings  that  cannot  be  uttered.  It  is  not  that  we  cannot  see  to  the 
depth  of  things  and  to  the  issue  of  events.  That  sometimes  causes  division 
of  mind  and  disharmony  of  will  between  man  and  man,  and  between  man 
and  God.  But  after  all  allowance  is  made  for  limitation  of  understanding 
and  imperfection  of  judgment,  there  remains  a  terrible  mystery  of  iniquity, 
an  insoluble  and  inexpugnable  mystery  of  evil  in  our  heart.  And  it  is  into 
our  mouth  who  are  thus  sin-mastered  and  sin-tormented  that  our  Lord  has 
put  this  penitential  and  submissive  prayer.  But  apart  from  this  evil  opposition 
to  the  will  of  God  there  is  another  manner  of  occasional  opposition  which  gives 
opportunity  for  the  offering  of  this  filial  prayer.  Every  human  will  has  two 
kinds  of  operation,  one  instinctive  and  spontaneous,  and  another  instructed 
and  deliberate.  Now,  the  instinctive  operations  of  my  will  may,  without  any 
vice  in  it  or  any  blame  to  me,  be  opposed  to  the  will  and  purpose  of  God  con 
cerning  me.  It  may  be  so  opposed  for  a  season,  yet  without  sin.  It  may  be 
so  opposed  till  my  better  will,  my  spiritually  reinforced  and  instructed  will 
comes  forward  to  reduce  and  silence  all  opposition,  and  to  choose  and  cause 
immediate  and  entire  submission.  We  see  all  this  finely  illustrated  in  our 
Lord  Himself,  as  the  conflicting  operations  of  His  will  are  set  before  us  in 
the  gospel  history.  His  will,  acting  naturally  and  instinctively,  turned 
away  with  deep  horror  and  strong  recoil  from  His  coming  death,  and 
especially  from  the  curse  that  in  His  case  accompanied  death.  But  the  next 
moment  His  nobler  will,  His  will  instructed  and  deliberate,  resolved  and 
devoted,  put  itself  with  all  its  weaknesses  and  fears  into  His  Father's  hand. 
If  I  may  -ray  so,  our  Lord  made  a  kind  of  correction  and'retractation  of  His  first 
prayer  of  agony.  Nature,  oppressed  and  overwhelmed  nature,  had  the  first 
alarmed  and  astonied  word,  but  grace  and  the  Sonship  soon  had  the  second. 
The  God  of  grace  is  first  the  God  of  nature,  and  nature  has  her  dues  before 
Him,  her  dues  which  He  will  not  deny.  And  one  of  the  dearest  and  most 
necessary  of  her  dues  is  just  her  permission  to  recoil  from  and  appeal  against 
suffering  and  death.  And  our  Lord  is  our  ensample  in  nature  as  well  as  in 
grace.  Let  us  be  ready  to  imitate  and  follow  Him  in  both ;  and  if  in  the 
recoil  and  appeal  of  nature,  then  also  in  the  surrender  and  victory  of  faith 
when  our  Gethsemane  receives  us,  and  our  full  cup  approaches  us. 

in  all  things— "We  pretend,"  says  a  Puritan  preacher,  "to  do  God's 
will  in  the  general,  but  when  we  come  to  particulars  we  stick  at  it."  It  is 
an  excellent  and  profitable  exercise  to  learn  to  reduce  this  large  and  general 
petition  into  its  parts  and  particulars  ;  into  the  particular  drops  that  fill  our 
cup,  and  the  particular  pains  produced  by  our  cross. 

as  the  angels  do  in  heaven.  "The  angels,"  says  the  hundred  and  third 
Psalm,  "that  excel  in  strength,  do  His  commandments,  hearkening  to  the 
voice  of  His  word."  And  Dante,  who  was  caught  up  into  the  heavenly 
places,  reports  to  us  that  he  heard  the  mighty  ranks  of  the  angelic  and 
glorified  hosts  singing — 

"As  we  from  step  to  step 

Are  placed  throughout  this  kingdom,  pleases  all, 
E'en  as  our  King,  who  in  us  plants  his  will ; 
And  in  his  will  is  our  tranquillity." 


THY    WILL    BE    DONE.  203 

That  is  to  say,  there  is  no  rebellion,  no  disappointment,  no  discontent,  no 
envy  among  the  angelic  hosts.  Gabriel  and  Michael  may  be  summoned  into 
their  Sovereign's  presence,  and  taken  into  His  counsels,  and  sent  down  to  earth 
on  the  most  glorious  of  errands,  and  those  who  are  not  so  summoned,  and 
trusted,  and  rewarded,  feel  no  bitterness,  and  entertain  no  malice  toward  their 
more  honoured  and  promoted  brethren.  And  as  God's  holy  angels  are,  such 
are  His  glorified  saints.  He  in  them  also  plants  His  will,  and  in  His  will  is 
their  tranquillity.  Each  saint  occupies  and  fills,  and  is  occupied  and  filled 
with  the  place  prepared  for  him  in  his  Father's  house.  They  aspire  to  no 
higher  place  than  that  He  appoints  them,  and  they  humble  themselves  to 
no  lower.  And  it  is  amid  the  ambitions,  contentions,  envies,  jealousies, 
and  detractions  of  this  life  that  we  are  permitted  and  enabled  to  offer  our 
submissive  supplications,  and  say,  "Thy  will  be  done  on  earth,  as  it  is  in 
heaven.' 

"Touching  angels  which  are  spirits  immaterial  and  intellectual,  the 
glorious  inhabitants  of  those  sacred  palaces,  where  nothing  but  light  and 
blessed  immortality,  no  shadow  of  matter  for  tears,  discontentments,  griefs,  and 
uncomfortable  passions  to  work  upon,  but  all  joy,  tranquillity,  and  peace,  even 
for  ever  and  ever  doth  dwell  :  as  in  number  and  order  they  are  huge,  mighty, 
and  royal  armies,  so  likewise  in  perfection  of  obedience  unto  that  law,  which 
the  Highest,  whom  they  adore,  love,  and  imitate,  hath  imposed  upon  them. 
Such  observants  are  they  thereof,  that  our  Saviour  Himself,  being  to  set 
clown  the  perfect  ideal  Ql  that  which  we  are  to  wish  and  pray  for  on  earth, 
did  not  teach  to  pray  or  wish  for  more  than  only  that  here  it  might  be  with 
us  as  with  them  it  is  in  heaven  "  (Hooker).  Isaac  Walton  tells  us  that  when 
this  great  divine  was  on  his  deathbed,  "Dr.  Saravia  visited  him,  and  found 
him  deep  in  contemplation,  and  not  inclined  to  discourse,  which  gave  the 
doctor  occasion  to  inquire  his  present  thoughts,  to  which  Hooker  replied 
'  that  he  was  meditating  the  nature  and  number  of  angels,  and  their  blessed 
obedience  and  order,  without  which  peace  could  not  be  in  heaven ;  and  oh 
that  it  might  be  so  on  earth  ! '  "  ' 

USES. — i.  Robert  Traill  says,  "Learn  to  pray  moderately  and  modestly;" 
and  Jeremy : Taylor,  writing  on  the  same  subject,  says,  "For  spiritual 
blessings  let  our  prayers  be  particularly  importunate,  perpetual,  and 
persevering;  for  temporal  blessings  let  them  be  generally  short,  condi 
tional,  and  modest." 

2.  "Give  up  thy  ways  to  God.     It  is  not  in  man  to  direct  his  own  steps. 
It  is  God  that  must  direct  them  for  thee,  for  He  works  all  things  accord 
ing  to  His  will.     If  any  man  in  the  world,  if  his  understanding  and  will 
were  a  rule  to  mine,  and  I  knew  he  were  infallible,  I  would  certainly  go 
give  up  all  my  ways  to  what  he  saith.     As  you  say  you  must  be  ruled 
by  him  that  bears  the  purse,  so  must  you  be  ruled  by  him  that  bears  the 
understanding"  (Goodwin). 

3.  "The  firmest  hold  of  theological  truth  is  gained  by  habits  of  personal 
religi9n.     When  men  begin  all  their  works  with  the  thought  of  God, 
acting  for  His  sake  and  to  fulfil  His  will,  when  they  ask  His  blessing  on 
themselves  and  their  life,  pray  to  Him  for  the  objects  they  desire,  and 
see  Him  in  the  event,  whether  it  be  according  to  their  prayers  or  not, 
they  will  find  that  everything  that  happens  tends  to  confirm  them  in  the 
truths  about  Him  which  live  in  their  imagination,  varied  and  unearthly 
as  those  truths  may  be  "  (Grammar  of  Assent}. 


204         THE    SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH    A   COMMENTARY. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Study  in   connection,   Ps.   xl.   8;  John  ix.   57,   vi.   38;  Matt.   xxui.    39;  Larger 
Catechism,   Question    192;    Confession    ix.    with    Macpherson's    notes;    and    Dante, 
Par.  Hi. 

2.  Giue  outstanding  examples  of  submission  to  the  Divine  Will  in  Scripture. 

3.  Explain  the  utterance  of  a  great  preacher  dealing  with  this  topic:  Prayer  is 
one  thing,  petition  is  another ;  and  that  life  is  most  holy  in  which  there  is  least 
of  petition  and  desire. 

4.  In  illustration  of  the  text  commit  to  memory  and  ponder  the  following  lines  ;— 

As  we  from  step  to  step 

Are  placed  throughout  this  kingdom,  pleases  all, 
E'en  as  our  King,  who  in  us  plants  his  will; 
And  in  his  will  is  our  tranquillity.— Dante. 

We,  ignorant  of  ourselves, 

Beg  often  our  own  harms,  which  the  wise  Powers 
Deny  us  for  our  good. — Shakespeare. 

Still  raise  for  good  the  supplicating  voice, 

But  leave  to  heaven  the  measure  and  the  choice.— Pope. 

Grant  us  not  the  ill 

We  blindly  ask ;  in  very  love  refuse 

Whate'er  Thou  knowest  our  weakness  would  abuse.— Keble. 

Thus  God  grants  prayer,  but  in  His  love 
Makes  times  and  ways  His  own.— Newman. 


Q.  104.    What  do  we  pray  for  in  the  fourth  petition  ? 

A.  In  the  fourth  petition  (which  is,  Give  us  this  day  our  daily 
Iread^)  we  pray,  That  of  God's  free  gift  we  may  receive  a  com 
petent  portion  of  the  good  things  of  this  life,  and  enjoy  his 
blessing  with  them.^ 

P  Matt.  vi.  ii. 

i  Prov.  xxx.  8  :  Remove  far  from  me  vanity  and  lies  ;  give  me  neither  poverty 
nor  riches;  feed  me  with  food  convenient  for  me:  Ver.  9:  Lest  I  be  full,  and 
deny  thee,  and  say,  Who  is  the  Lord  ?  or  lest  I  be  poor,  and  steal,  and  take  the 
name  of  my  God  in  vain.  Gen.  xxviii.  20  :  And  Jacob  vowed  a  vow,  saying,  If 
God  will  be  with  me,  and  will  keep  me  in  this  way  that  I  go,  and  will  give  me 
bread  to  eat,  and  raiment  to  put  on.  i  Tim.  iv.  4  :  For  every  creature  of  God  is 
good,  and  nothing  to  be  refused,  if  it  be  received  with  thanksgiving  :  Ver.  5  :  For 
it  is  sanctified  by  the  word  of  God  and  prayer. 

The  fourth,  petition — "It  is  known,"  says  Archbishop  Leighton,  "to  be 
the  ordinary  course  of  skilful  orators  to  place  the  meanest  part  of  their  speech 
in  the  middle ;  and  in  this  let  the  ear  of  any  understanding  mind  be  judge 
whether  it  sounds  not  much  better  that  this  request  pass  in  the  middle  than  if 
the  prayer  should  have  ended  with  it,  whereas  now  it  begins  spiritually  and 
closes  so." 

Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread — The  first  step  to  be  taken  toward  the 
full  understanding  of  this  petition  is  to  ask  what  exactly  it  meant  in  the 


GIVE   US   THIS    DAY   OUR   DAILY   BREAD.  205 

mouths  of  the  first  disciples  who  offered  it.  Now,  to  answer  that  question  we 
have  only  to  recall  the  new  and  peculiar  circumstances  into  which  their 
Master  had  brought  them  by  the  call  He  had  addressed  to  them,  and  then  to 
reflect  on  the  extraordinary  "ordination  charge"  He  had  subsequently  given 
them.  For  what  is  expressly  stated  of  some  of  the  disciples  may  be  assumed 
concerning  every  one  of  the  twelve — they  had  left  all  and  followed  Him. 
And  it  was  to  men  in  that  impoverished  condition  that  their  Master  issued 
this  injunction,  Provide  neither  gold,  nor  silver,  nor  brass  in  your  purses,  but 
offer  this  as  your  daily  prayer,  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread.  At  His  call 
they  had  cut  themselves  off  for  ever  from  their  wonted  means  of  livelihood, 
and,  as  they  enter  on  their  new  occupation  for  life, — that  of  preaching  the 
gospel  of  the  kingdom, — their  Master  commands  them  to  cast  themselves  on 
this  new  means  of  subsistence,  on  daily  and  special  prayer,  and  on  the  fruit  of 
their  Messianic  labours  in  the  land.  But  prayer  for  daily  bread  does  not 
supersede  provident  habits.  Nothing,  indeed,  could  better  bring  out  the 
spiritual,  and,  so  to  say,  elastic  nature  of  our  Lord's  injunction  than  the  fact 
that  before  long  we  find  the  little  company  possessed  of  a  common  purse,  held 
in  the  hand  of  a  recognised  purse-bearer,  whose  duty  it  was  to  receive  such 
gifts  as  were  offered  to  him,  to  lay  them  out  on  buying  what  was. needed  by 
his  colleagues,  and  in  relieving  such  deserving  poor  as  they  came  across. 

a  competent  portion  of  the  good  things  of  this  life— A  competent  portion 
is  a  comparative  expression.  It  varies  with  the  varying  circumstances  and 
characters  of  men.  "Cedars,"  said  old  Ezekiel  Hopkins,  "require  more  sap 
than  shrubs."  By  that  metaphor  he  means  that  what  would  be  straitness 
and  want  to  one  man  would  be  abundance  and  richness  to  another.  Men  of 
birth,  and  position,  and  employment,  and  opportunity,  when  they  are  also 
men  of  piety,  and  offer  this  prayer,  they  offer  it  for  far  other  and  far  nobler 
things  than  wheaten  or  barley  bread.  They  offer  it  for  all  things  that  are 
needed  to  support  them  in,  and  equip  them  for,  the  eminent  life  into  which 
God  hath  lifted  them.  For  deprived  of  the  means  of  doing  their  work  and 
fulfilling  the  duties  and  opportunities  of  their  office  would  be  to  them  the 
taking  away  of  life  itself.  A  cedar  may  thus  stretch  forth  its  branches,  seeking 
showers  that  would  drown  and  destroy  a  less  noble  and  less  stately  tree. 

Matthew  Henry  says  that  "Nature  is  content  with  little,  grace  with  less, 
but  lust  with  nothing."  And  in  another  place,  "  If  you  seek  first  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  you  shall  have  food  and  raiment  by  way  of  overplus,  as 
he  that  buys  goods  hath  paper  and  packthread  given  him  over  and  above 
into  the  bargain." 

"  This  only  grant  me,  that  my  means  may  lie 
Too  low  for  envy,  for  contempt  too  high. 

Some  honour  I  would  have, 
Not  from  great  deeds,  but  from  good  alone. 
The  unknown  are  better  than  ill-known  ; 

Rumour  can  ope  the  grave.  . 

Acquaintance  I  would  have  :  but  when't  depends 
Not  on  the  number,  but  the  choice  of  friends." 

— COWI.EY'S  Wish. 

his  blessing  with  them.  "  The  Christian  custom  of  saying  grace  at  meals, 
after  the  example  of  Christ  (Matt.  xiv.  19,  xv.  36),  and  which  prevailed  also 
generally  in  the  ancient  Church  (Acts  xxvii.  35),  has  a  high  moral  significancy  ; 
it  rescues  the  natural  enjoyments  from  the  stage  of  mere  sensuousncss,  and 
elevates  it  into  the  sphere  of  the  moral  "  (Wuttke). 


206          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM  WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

Note. — The  original  word  here  rendered  daily  is  a  remarkable  word.  Re- 
markable  in  this  respect,  that  it  occurs  but  once  in  all  the  New  Testament,  and 
the  most  careful  search  has  failed  to  discover  it  in  any  other  Greek  writing. 
How  then  can  we  be  sure  what  it  means?  For  we  usually  arrive  at  the 
meaning  of  a  word  in  one  passage  by  studying  its  use  in  other  passages,  But 
how  are  we  to  know  what  a  particular  word  means  when  it  is  used  but  once 
in  all  the  language  in  which  it  is  found  ?  There  is,  indeed,  another  way  of 
coming  at  the  meaning  of  a  word,  and  that  way  is  by  searching  out  its 
etymology,  and  interrogating  the  root  from  which  it  springs.  But  here,  too, 
our  best  scholarship  is  at  fault ;  for  learned  men  are  not  agreed  as  to  the 
parentage  of  this  singular  and  isolated  word.  At  the  same  time,  from  the 
context,  from  the  analogy  of  Scripture,  and  other  things,  the  vast  majority  of 
translators  and  commentators  have  come  to  render  this  unique  term  by  the 
familiar  word  daily.  They  believe  that  our  Lord  meant  simply,  in  the  first 
intention  at  any  rate,  daily  bread  for  the  bodily  life  of  His  detached  and 
itinerant  disciples.  At  the  same  time,  no  man  with  much  of  the  mind  and 
spirit  of  Christ  in  him  will  be  content,  in  offering  this  prayer,  to  limit  himself 
to  bread  baked  in  any  earthly  oven.  No  spiritual  man,  however  scrupulously 
and  jealously  grammatical  he  may  be  in  his  interpretation  of  the  written 
word,  could  read  this  petition  in  Scripture  or  offer  it  in  public  or  private 
prayer  without  far  other  bread  coming  up  before  His  mind  than  simply 
the  bread  needful  for  the  body.  Jerome,  the  great  translator  of  the  Bible, 
was  so  impressed  with  the  spiritual  bearing  of  this  petition,  that  he  rendered 
it  super-substantial  or  transcendental  bread.  And  with  such  passages  before 
him  as  Deut.  viii.  3,  Job  xxiii.  12,  Jer.  xv.  16,  Matt.  iv.  4,  John  iv.  8, 
31-34,  vi.  35,  51,  he  is  not  to  be  blamed  for  leaning  in  his  version  to  the 
mystical  and  spiritual  interpretation. 

USES. — i.  What  is  the  first  inference  ?  That  we  seek  not  great  matters 
for  ourselves,  neither  make  them  the  matter  of  prayer  to  God,  nor  the 
end  and  design  of  our  labours  and  callings  among  men. 

2.  What  is  the  second  inference  from  hence?      That  having   food   and 
raiment,  we  must  therewith  be  content  and  be  thankful. 

3.  What  is  the  third  inference  ?     That  we  ascribe  not  our  success  in  the 
world  to  our  own  skill  and  industry,  for  the  wisest  and  most  industrious 
do  sometimes  labour  in  the  fire,  and  put  their  gains  in  a  bag  of  holes, 
but   to   God's    free  donation    to    us,    and   to   His   blessing    upon   our 
endeavours  (Flavel's  Catechism). 

QUESTIONS. 
7.  Point  out  the  ambiguity  in  the  first  quotation  from  Matthew  Henry  above. 

2.  Explain  and  illustrate  Ezekiel  Hopkins'  metaphor:  Cedars  require  more  sap  than 
shrubs. 

3.  What  do  you  know  of  the  translator's   difficulty  with  this  petition  ?    How  is  it 
met  in  the  Vulgate,  and  wherein  does  that  rendering  differ  from  ours  ? 

4.  Read  Bacon's  Essay  Of  Riches. 


FORGIVE  US  OUR  DEBTS.  207 

Q.  105.    What  do  we  pray  for  in  the  fifth  petition  ? 

A.  In  the  fifth  petition  (which  is,  And  forgive  us  our  debts,  as 
we  forgive  our  debtors*}  we  pray,  That  God,  for  Christ's  sake, 
would  freely  pardon  all  our  sins  j s  which  we  are  the  rather 
encouraged  to  ask,  because  by  his  grace  we  are  enabled  from 
the  heart  to  forgive  others.  * 

r  Matt.  vi.  12. 

8  Ps.  li.  i :  Have  mercy  upon  me,  O  God,  according  to  thy  loving-kindness  ; 
according  unto  the  multitude  of  thy  tender  mercies  blot  out  my  transgressions. 
Ver.  2 :  Wash  me  throughly  from  mine  iniquity,  and  cleanse  me  from  my  sin. 
Ver.  7 :  Purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  clean  ;  wash  me,  and  1  shall  be 
whiter  than  snow.  Ver.  9  :  Hide  thy  face  from  my  sins,  and  blot  out  all  mine 
iniquities.  Dan.  ix.  17,  18,  19. 

*  Luke  xi.  4  :  And  forgive  us  our  sins  ;  for  we  also  forgive 'every  one  that  is 
indebted  to  us.  Matt,  xviii.  35  :  So  likewise  shall  my  heavenly  Father  do  also 
unto  you,  if  ye  from  your  hearts  forgive  not  every  one  his  brother  their  trespasses. 

Forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we  forgive  our  debtors—"  We  have  now  done 
with  the  supplications  of  this  prayer,  and  are  come  to  the  deprecations. 
The  supplications  are  those  petitions  which  we  make  to  God  for  obtaining  of 
that  which  is  good.  The  deprecations  are  those  petitions  we  make  to  God 
for  removing  of  that  which  is  evil  "  (Manton). 

Debt  is  one  of  a  "  mournfully  numerous  group  "  of  names  that  are  applied 
to  human  sin  and  guilt  in  the  word  of  God.  This  is  'one  of  the  least  odious 
and  loathsome  of  those  evil  names,  but  it  has  a  sufficiently  solemn  sense  of 
its  own.  Debt  is  that  which  we  owe  ;  it  is  that  which  is  clue  ;  it  is  that 
which  lays  one  man  under  obligation  and  liability  to  another.  A  debt  may 
be  expressed  and  described  in  terms  of  money,  or  service,  or  suffering,  but 
its  ruling  idea  is  always  that  of  obligation  and  liability.  Only,  in  the  present 
case,  we  must  exclude  from  our  definition  of  debt  all  associations  connected 
with  monetary  or  commercial  transactions.  The  liability  here  is  of  a  far 
other  and  more  awful  kind  than  that  which  is  connected  with  any  earthly 
merchandise  or  exchange.  The  debts  we  have  to  do  with  here  are  those  we 
all  owe  to  the  divine  law  and  justice.  "  The  faults  or  sins  we  are  guilty  of 
oblige  us  and  bind  us  to  punishment ;  and  therefore  sins  are  called  debts. 
The  original  debt  we  owe  is  obedience ;  and,  in  case  of  default,  the  next 
debt  we  owe  is  punishment"  (Manton).  "  Q.  Wherefore  are  sins  called 
debts  ? — A .  Because  they  are  a  non-payment  of  God's  dues,  a  non-performance 
of  our  duty,  which  makes  us  liable  to  the  arrest  of  death,  and  to  the  prison 
of  hell"  (Flavel's  Catechism]. 

we  pray  that  God,  for  Christ's  sake— It  will  be  seen  that  the  Catechism 
borrows  from  later  and  fuller  Scriptures,  and  imports  into  its  text  a  clause 
that  is  not  found  in  either  of  the  original  versions  of  the  Lord's  Prayer. 
"  For  Christ's  sake"  is  a  scriptural  and  necessary  addition  to  all  our  prayers, 
but  it  had  not  as  yet  taken  its  place  in  any  prayer  offered  during  our  Lord's 
earthly  lifetime.  "The  Lord's  Prayer  does  not  end,  as  our  prayers  now 
commonly  do,  with  the  formula,  '  for  Christ's  sake  ; '  nor  could  it.  No 
prayer  given  by  Him  for  the  present  use  of  His  disciples  before  His  death 
could  have  such  an  ending,  because  the  plea  it  contains  was  not  intelligible 
to  them  previous  to  that  event.  The  disciples  did  not  yet  know  what  Christ's 


208          THE   SHORTER    CATECHISM   WITH    A   COMMENTARY. 

sake  meant,  nor  would  they  till  after  their  Lord  had  ascended,  and  the  Spirit 
had  descended  and  revealed  to  them  the  true  meaning  of  the  facts  of  Christ's 
earthly  history "  (Bruce,  Training  of  Twelve).  (See  John  xvi.  24,  xiv.  6; 
Rom.  v.  2;  Eph.  iv.  32.)  On  2  Cor.  xiii.  14,  Bengel  says,  "Christ  is  men 
tioned  in  the  first  place,  because  it  is  by  the  grace  of  Christ  we  come  to  the 
Father." 

freely  pardon  all  our  sins — See  Answer  33  and  notes.  In  considering 
God's  promises  to  forgive  sins,  Donne  asks,  "Does  He  mean  all  my  sins? 
He  knows  what  original  sin  is,  and  I  do  not  ;  and  will  He  forgive  me  sin 
in  that  root,  and  sin  in  the  branches  too  ?  He  knows  my  secret  sins,  and  I 
do  not ;  will  He  forgive  my  manifest  sins  and  those  too  ?  He  knows  my 
relapses  into  sins  repented  of;  and  will  He  forgive  my  faint  relapses,  and 
my  rebellious  relapses  after  them  ?  Will  His  mercy  dive  into  my  heart,  and 
forgive  my  sinful  thoughts  there,  and  shed  itself  upon  my  lips,  and  forgive 
my  blasphemous  words  there,  and  bathe  the  members  of  my  body,  and  for 
give  my  unclean  actions  there  ?  Will  He  forgive  that  dim  sight  which  I  have 
of  sins  now,  when  sins  scarce  appear  to  be  sins  unto  me  ;  and  will  He  forgive 
that  overquick  sight  when  I  shall  see  my  sins  through  Satan's  multiplying 
glass  of  desperation,  when  I  shall  see  them  greater  than  His  mercy  on  my 
death-bed?"  "The  forgiveness  that  there  is  with  God  is  not  like  that 
narrow,  difficult,  halving,  and  manacled  forgiveness  that  is  found  among 
men  ;  but  it  is  full,  free,  bottomless,  boundless,  absolute,  such  as  becomes 
His  nature  and  His  excellencies  "  (Owen). 

which  we  are  the  rather  encouraged  to  ask — If  pardon  is  impossible  to 
the  implacable  man  (Matt.  vi.  15,  xviii.  35  ;  Jas.  ii.  13),  on  the  other  hand 
this  "  terrible  petition"  becomes  a  positive  ground  of  assurance  to  the  meek 
and  loving  and  forgiving  heart.  The  forgiveness  of  our  enemies  is  nowhere 
set  forth  as  the  ground  of  any  sinner's  acceptance  before  God,  but  it  is  often  . 
set  forth,  and  may  be  relied  on  as  a  most  valid  ground  of  assurance  of  accept 
ance.  The  cross  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  only  door  open  to  us  out  of  our  estate 
of  guilt  and  alienation  ;  but  if  something  of  that  mind  that  was  found  in 
Christ  on  the  cross  when  He  prayed  for  His  murderers  is  found  in  us,  then 
that  mind  is  a  little  wicket-gate  that  opens  under  the  great  gate  of  the  cross 
through  which  a  too  diffident  mind  may  find  some  little  liberty  of  access. 
Calvin  says  that  the  consciousness  of  possessing  a  forgiving  spirit  is  a  sort  of 
seal  that  God  sets  to  our  own  hope  of  forgiveness.  "The  Spirit  itself 
beareth  witness  with  our  spirit  that  we  are  the  children  of  God." 

"  Wouldst  thou  draw  near  the  nature  of  the  gods? 
Draw  near  them,  then,  in  being  merciful, 
Sweet  mercy  is  nobility's  true  badge."  i 

from  the  heart  to  forgive  others.  Augustine  somewhere  calls  this  a 
"  terrible  petition,"  and  when  we  sufficiently  think  of  it  we  feel  that  he  is 
right.  For  do  I  not  ask  a  terrible  thing  when  I  ask  God  to  do  to  me  as  I  do 
to  my  most  evil  neighbour  and  most  hurtful  enemy  ?  Augustus  Hare,  in 
his  Sermons  to  a  Country  Congregation,  has  expanded  this  idea  of  Augustine's 
into  what  he  calls  "  The  Revengeful  Man's  Prayer."  Those  who  possess  the 
book  will  do  well  to  read  that  prayer  and  try  to  offer  it,  and  those  who  cannot 
read  it  may  not  less  profitably  imagine  it  for  themselves.  "This  condition  is 
added,  that  no  one  may  presume  to  approach  God  and  ask  forgiveness,  who 
is  not  pure  and  free  from  all  resentment.  .  .  .  And  certainly,  if  the  Spirit  of 


FORGIVE   US    OUR    DEBTS.  20Q 

God  reigns  in  our  hearts,  every  description  of  revenge  and  ill-will  ought  to 
be  banished.  The  Spirit  is  the  witness  of  our  adoption,  and  therefore 
this  is  simply  put  down  as  a  mark  to  distinguish  the  children  of  God  from 
strangers "  (Calvin).  "Shall  I  send  you  to  the  old  saying  which  contains 
as  much  mercy  and  as  much  wisdom  as  was  ever  put  by  man  into  three  words  ? 
— the  saying,  Forgive  and  forget.  Forgiving  and  forgetting  is  the  pardon 
which  we  desire  from  God  ;  therefore,  forgiving  and  forgetting  is  the  pardon 
which  we  are  to  grant  to  man  "  (Hare). 

USES. — i.  "  This  injunction  has  ever  been  a  stumbling-block  in  the  way  of 
the  advocates  of  perfection,  from  Pelagius  to  the  present  day.  For  not 
only  do  the  holy  men  of  God  throughout  the  Scriptures,  in  coming  into 
His  presence,  come  always  with  the  confession  of  sin  and  imperfections, 
praying  for  mercy,  but  our  Lord  has  taught  all  His  disciples,  whenever 
they  address  their  Father  in  heaven,  to  say,  Forgive  us  our  trespasses  " 
(Hodge). 

2.  "  Here  is  a  ground  of  trial  whether  we  are  pardoned  or  no :  Is  our 
revengeful  disposition,  that  is  so  natural  and  so  pleasing  to  us,  mortified  ? 
That  is  one  trial  or  evidence  whether  we  are  forgiven  of  God ;  can  we 
freely,  from  the  heart,  forgive  others  ?  "  (Manton). 

3.  We  must  be  very  watchful  and  scrupulous  to  cleanse  our  hearts  of  all 
anger  and  hatred  and  malice  and  desire  for  revenge.     We  must  cast  all 
men's  insults  and  injuries  into  the  depths  of  the  sea.     We  must  be  not 
less  anxious  to  wash  out  of  our  hearts  every  stain  that  our  enemies  have 
left  there,  than  we  are  that  our  sins  may  be  blotted  out  of  God's  remem 
brance  book.     Nor  must  we  be  content  with  freely  and  fully  forgiving 
our  enemies,— we  must  wish  them  well,  and  befriend  them  when  we  have 
opportunity.     And  when  we  have  no  opportunity,  we  must  make  it,  if 
we  would  do  to  our  enemies  as  God  did  to  His.     For  God  made  oppor 
tunities  to  forgive  and  favour  and  befriend  us.     He  saw  there  was  no 
man,  and  He  wondered  there  was  no  intercessor ;    therefore  His  arm 
brought  salvation,  and  His  righteousness  it  sustained  Him. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Point  out  the  significance  of  the  remarkable  reduplication  and  amplification  in 
Matt.  ui.  74,  15. 

2.  What  docs  Augustine  mean  by  calling  this  a  terrible  petition? 

3.  How  does  this  petition  bear  on  the  Pelagian  and  Perfectionist  position  ? 

4.  Read,  in  connection  with  this  exposition,  7  Sam.  xxiv. ;  Ps.  xviii.  20-26 ;  Matt, 
xv Hi.  21-35. 

5.  What  is  meant  by  the  saying,  that  this  passage  does  not  set  forth  ground  of 
acceptance,  but  that  it  does  exhibit  a  ground  of  assurance  ? 


Q.  1 06.    What  do  we  pray  for  in  the  sixth  petition  ? 
A.  In  the  sixth  petition  (which  is,  And  lead  its  not  into  tempta 
tion,  but  deliver  us  from  tvu9)  we  pray,  That  God  would  either 

u  Matt.  vi.  13. 

o 


210          THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A    COMMENTARY. 

keep  us  from  being  tempted  to  sin,v  or  support  and  deliver  us 
when  we  are  tempted. w 

v  Matt.  xxvi.  41  :  Watch  and  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation  :  the 
spirit  indeed  is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weak. 

w  2  Cor.  xii.  8  :  For  this  thing  I  besought  the  Lord  thrice,  that  it  might  depart 
from  me. 

Lead  us  not  into  temptation — The  familiar  word  temptation  is  used  in  two 
very  different  senses  in  Holy  Scripture.  For  example,  in  the  twenty-second 
chapter  of  the  Book  of  Genesis  we  read  that  "  God  did  tempt  Abraham  ;" 
and  again,  in  the  Epistle  of  James  we  find  it  written,  "  My  brethren, 
count  it  all  joy  when  ye  fall  into  divers  temptations."  In  both  these  passages 
the  word  temptation  is  employed  in  what  may  be  called  its  good  sense. 
Temptation  in  this  sense  has  for  its  end  and  object  the  testing  and  manifesta 
tion  of  spiritual  strength  and  moral  integrity,  that  but  for  the  temptation 
would  neither  be  exercised  nor  exhibited.  The  furnace  tests  or  tempts  the 
true  gold.  The  storm  tests  or  tempts  the  rooted  tree.  And  "  divers  temp 
tations  "  test  and  strengthen  the  faithful  and  patient  soul,  making  it  perfect 
and  entire,  wanting  nothing. 

But  the  evil  sense  of  temptation  is  the  more  familiar  sense  in  the  word  of 
God.  And  this  is  the  sense  of  the  word  in  the  text.  Dr.  John  Owen,  in  his 
treatise  Of  Temptation,  thus  defines  temptation  in  its  evil  sense  :  "  Temptation 
is  any  thing,  state,  way,  or  condition  that,  upon  any  account  whatever,  hath 
a  force  or  efficacy  to  seduce  or  draw  the  mind  and  heart  of  a  man  from  its 
obedience,  which  God  requires  of  him,  into  any  sin,  in  any  degree  of  it 
whatever." 

A  temptation,  then,  may  be  good  or  evil,  may  be  for  salvation  or  de 
struction,  according  to  circumstances,  according  to  the  intention  with  which 
it  is  sent,  and  according  to  the  spirit  in  which  it  is  met.  A  temptation  may 
lead  the  unwary  soul  into  the  chambers  of  death,  or  it  may  put  a  man  in  the 
way  of  gaining  for  himself  the  crown  of  eternal  life.  A  tempted  man  may 
come  out  of  his  temptations  a  stronger,  holier,  happier  man ;  in  Job's  words, 
when  he  is  tried  he  may  come  forth  like  gold  ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  he  may 
"crumble  to  dust  beneath  the  tempter's  dart;"  he  may  come  forth  of  the 
refiner's  fire  like  reprobate  silver.  And  it  is  just  because  weak  and  corrupt 
men  come,  for  the  most  part,  so  ill  out  of  their  temptations,  that  they  are 
taught  to  make  it  their  daily  prayer,  "lead  us  not  into  temptation." 

but  deliver  us  from  evil — "The  last  words  are,  as  it  were,  exegetical." 
There  are  two  exegetical  questions  that  have  been  debated  from  the  beginning 
about  this  clause  in  the  Lord's  Prayer.  Is  this  clause  to  be  taken  as  a 
separate  and  additional  petition  ?  Is  this  a  seventh  and  different  petition  ?  or 
is  it  only  another  way  of  repeating  the  sixth, — an  antithetical  way  of  repeating 
what  has  already  been  said,  "lead  us  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver  us  from 
evil  "  ?  That  is  the  first  question  raised  about  this  clause,  and  the  second  is 
this  :  Ought  the  original  to  be  translated  from  evil,  or  from  the  Evil  One? 
This  question  has  of  late  been  brought  into  great  prominence  by  the  publica 
tion  of  the  Revised  Version,  and  among  the  learned  productions  that  the 
late  revision  of  the  New  Testament  has  called  forth,  this  proposed  reading  has 
been  fully  dealt  with. 


LEAD  us  NOT  INTO  TEMPTATION.  211 

keep  us  from  being  tempted  to  sin,  or  support  and  deliver  us  when 
we  are  tempted — Every  temptation  has  its  times,  and  runs  its  course. 
There  is  a  season,  short  or  long,  when  the  transgression  is  still  a  tempta 
tion.  There  is  a  time  when,  if  it  is  not  exactly  easy  to  resist  the  temptation, 
it  is  at  least  possible  to  do  so.  For  as  Thomas  a  Kempis,  a  great  master 
in  the  things  of  the  soul,  says,  "There  first  cometh  to  the  mind  a  bare 
thought-of  evil,  then  a  strong  imagination  thereof,  afterwards  delight  and  an 
evil  motion,  and  then  consent. "  He,  then,  who  offers  this  prayer  must  keep 
a  sleepless  watch  over  his  thoughts.  He  must  beware  of  those  times,  and 
places,  and  states  of  mind  in  which  evil  thoughts  intrude  themselves.  And 
he  will  soon  learn  by  experience  that  a  vacant  mind  and  an  idle  life  is  a  very 
door  of  temptation.  A  busy  life,  by  God's  blessing,  is  a  safe  life.  Curiosity 
concerning  evil  and  forbidden  things  is  a  cause  of  many  temptations  assailing 
the  soul.  It  is  impossible  to  quench  such  sinful  curiosity  in  a  human  heart ; 
and  unhappily,  once  learned,  the  knowledge  of  sin  is  a  knowledge  that  is 
never  forgotten.  Times  of  reaction  also,  times  of  isolation  and  mental 
depression,  are  often  times  when  it  is  most  difficult  to  keep  temptation  out  of 
the  heart.  Loneliness,  also,  supplies  a  vantage  ground  to  temptation. 

Now  it  is  just  at  such  times  as  these  that  our  Lord  encourages  us  to  look  up 
and  offer  the  prayer,  Lead  us  not  into  temptation,  or,  Support  and  deliver  us 
when  we  are  tempted.  And  this  God  sometimes  does  by  means  of  providential 
interpositions,  of  which  every  gracious  heart  has  many  records.  Sometimes, 
again,  He  suddenly  chills  the  heart  against  the  offered  evil,  or  draws  the 
soul  into  the  secret  of  His  pavilion  till  the  storm  of  temptation  is  wholly 
overpast. 

USES. — i.  "Temptations,  when  we  meet  them  first,  are  as  the  lion  that 
roared  upon  Samson  ;  but  if  we  overcome  them,  the  next  time  we  see 
them  we  shall  find  a  nest  of  honey  within  them  "  (Bunyan's  Preface  to 
Grace  Abounding}. 

2.  "  Why  comes  temptation,  but  for  man  to  meet 

And  master  and  make  crouch  beneath  his  feet, 
And  so  be  pedestalled  in  triumph?    Pray 
Lead  us  into  no  such  temptations,  Lord  ! 
Yea,  but,  O  Thou  whose  servants  are  the  bold, 
Lead  such  temptations  by  the  head  and  hair, 
Reluctant  dragons,  up  to  who  dares  fight, 
That  so  he  may  do  battle  and  have  praise  ! " 

— BROWNING. 

3.  "  What  is  meant  by  evil?     Some  understand  it  of  the  devil,  but  the  best 
meaning  is  sin,  which  is  the  worst  of  evils,  and  makes  the  devil  evil,  and 
is  the  worst  of  evils  the  devil  can  bring  upon  us,  and  is  usually  so  under 
stood  in  Scripture  "  (Flavel). 

4.  "When  you  have  conceived  sin,  hath  God  weakened  your  power  for 
sin,  or  denied  you  opportunity,  or  taken  away  the  object  of  your  lusts,  or 
diverted  your  thoughts  by  new  providences?     Know  assuredly  that  you 
have  received  grace  thereby.   .  .  .   Had  not  God  thus  dealt  with  you,  it 
may  be  this  day  you  had  been  a  terror  to  yourselves,  a  shame  to  your 
relations,  and  under  the  punishment  due  to  notorious  sins  "  (Owen). 


212         THE   SHORTER   CATECHISM   WITH   A   COMMENTARY. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Reconcile  Gen,  xxii.  1  and  Num.  xiv.  22  with  Jas.  I.  13. 

2.  Giue  two  passages  in  the  New  Testament  where  the  title  of  The  Tempter  is  given 
to  Satan. 

3.  Exhibit  from  the  cases  of  our  Lord  and  two  of  His  disciples  the  three  possible 
issues  of  temptation,  victorious  obedience,  repentance,  and  remorse. 

4.  Support  from  Scripture  and  explain  the  saying :  Christ  was  tempted  that  He 
might  be  made  like  unto  us,  and  we  are  tempted  that  we  may  be  made  like  unto 
Him. 


Q.  107.    What  doth  the  conclusion  of  the  Lord's  prayer  teach  us  ? 

A.  The  conclusion  of  the  Lord's  prayer  (which  is,  For  thine  is 
the  kingdom,  and  the  power,  and  the  glory,  for  ever,  Amen*) 
teacheth  us  to'  take  our  encouragement  in  prayer  from  God 
only,y  and  in  our  prayers  to  praise  him,  ascribing  kingdom, 
power,  and  glory  to  him.2  And,  in  testimony  of  our  desire,  and 
assurance  to  be  heard,  we  say,  Amen? 

x  Matt.  vi.  13. 

y  Dan.  ix.  4-19. 

z  i  Chron.  xxix.  10-13  :  Thine,  O  Lord,  is  the  greatness,  and  the  power,  and 
the  glory,  and  the  victory,  and  the  majesty  :  for  all  that  is  in  the  heaven  and  in 
the  earth  is  thine  ;  thine  is  the  kingdom,  O  Lord,  and  thou  art  exalted  as  head 
above  all. 

a  i  Cor.  xiv.  16  :  Else,  when  thou  shalt  bless  with  the  spirit,  how  shall  he  that 
occupieth  the  room  of  the  unlearned  say  Amen  at  thy  giving  of  thanks,  seeing  he 
understandeth  not  what  thou  sayest?  Rev.  xxii.  20:  He  \vhich  testified!  these 
things  saith,  Surely  I  come  quickly.  Amen.  Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus.  Ver.  21 : 
The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all.  Amen. 

For  thine  is  the  kingdom — The  conjunction  for  grounds  the  whole  prayer 
on  the  fact  that  the  kingdom  prayed  for  in  the  second  petition  is  God's 
kingdom,  and  the  power  put  forth  in  it,  and  petitioned  to  be  put  forth  in  this 
prayer  is  God's  power,  as  is  and  will  be  all  the  glory.  All  this  is  put  forward 
as  a  sufficient  and  final  reason  why  the  petitioner  should  be  heard.  The  full 
and  final  New  Testament  ground  of  a  Christian  prayer  is  the  name  and  merits 
and  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ ;  but  this  prayer  was  taught  by  our  Lord  before 
the  time  had  come  to  ask  in  His  name.  But  no  Christian  can  now  offer  this 
or  any  prayer  without  putting  forward  the  Lord  Jesus  as  his  alone  ground  and 
argument  with  the  Father. 

to  take  our  encouragement  in  prayer  from  God  only — "  The  knowledge 

of  our  own  unworthiness  is  not  without  belief  in  the  merits  of  Christ.  With 
that  true  fear  which  the  one  causeth  there  is  coupled  true  boldness,  and 
encouragement  drawn  from  the  other.  The  very  silence  that  our  unworthi 
ness  putteth  us  into,  doth  itself  make  request  for  us,  and  that  in  the  confidence 
of  His  grace.  Looking  inward  we  are  stricken  dumb ;  looking  upward  we 
speak  and  prevail "  (Hooker). 


THE  CONCLUSION  OF  THE  LORD'S  PRAYER.       213 

in  our  prayers  to  praise  him— "  Faith,  self-denial,  a  holy  life,  patient 
endurance  of  the  cross,  are  all  sacrifices  which  please  God.  But  as  prayer  is 
the  offering  of  faith,  and  uniformly  accompanied  with  patience  and  mortifica 
tion  of  sin,  while  praise,  while  it  is  genuine,  indicates  holiness  of  heart,  we 
need  not  wonder  that  these  two  points  of  worship  should  here  be  employed  to 
represent  the  whole  "  (Calvin).  "Thanksgiving  is  a  nobler  and  more  divinely 
generous  duty  than  prayer,  for  self-love  puts  us  upon  praying  for  benefits ; 
but  thanks  is  a  more  free,  defecate,  and  pure  act  "  (Goodwin). 

There  was  a  rabbinical  saying  to  the  effect  that  in  the  days  of  the  Messiah 
all  prayer  shall  cease,  but  thanksgiving  shall  not  cease  ;  all  oblations  shall 
cease,  but  the  eucharistical  oblation  shall  not  cease. 

in  testimony  of  our  desire,  and  assurance  to  be  heard,  we  say, 
Amen.  The  Hebrew  idiom  rendered  literally  in  the  margin  of  Jas.  v.  17, 
brings  out  finely  the  force  of  the  prophet's  desire.  And  it  suggests  to  us  to 
inquire  whether  we  pray  in  our  prayers.  Desire  is  the  life  and  power  of 
prayer.  The  assurance  of  this  passage  is  not  the  assurance  of  Answer  36. 
There  it  is  the  assurance  of  our  personal  acceptance  and  adoption,  here  it  is 
the  assurance  that  what  we  ask  we  shall  receive,  because  God  has  so  promised. 
This  is  "the  full  assurance  of  faith  "  set  forth  in  Heb.  x.  22.  And  Amen 
correctly  understood  and  rightly  used,  expresses,  as  the  text  teaches,  both  our 
desire  to  be  heard,  and  our  assurance  that  we  shall  be  heard. 

"  The  short  word  with  which  the  person  spoken  to  answered  all  adjurations, 
was  the  familiar  amen,  a  little  word  which  properly  corresponds  only  to  our 
yes  !  and  which  subsequently  found  the  most  diverse  applications,  but  which, 
in  the  use  here  explained,  goes  back  to  the  earliest  times  of  the  community  " 
(Evvald). 

Amen  is  a  Hebrew  word  transliterated  and  naturalized  into  English,  which 
when  translated  means  true,  faithful,  trustworthy.  It  was  transliterated  also 
into  the  language  spoken  by  our  Lord,  and  we  find  Him  constantly  using  the 
word  as  a  formula  for  introducing  His  more  weighty  and  solemn  utterances. 
Amen,  Anun  ;  verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you.  In  the  Epistle  to  Laodicea, 
our  Lord  takes  to  Himself  the  name  of  Amen,  the  faithful  and  true  Witness  ; 
and  in  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  the  apostle  says  that  all  the 
promises  of  God  are  in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ,  Yea,  and  Amen.  Augustine 
says  that  when  this  word  is  found  on  the  lips  of  the  faithful,  it  is  their  seal  and 
consent  and  adstipulation  to  all  that  has  been  spoken.  And  Jerome  says, 
"  It  is  the  seal  of  our  consent."  "  Faith  has  its  silence  to  lend  an  ear  to  the 
word  of  God.  It  has  afterwards  its  turn  to  speak  and  answer  Amen,  accord 
ing  to  that  passage,  Hos.  ii.  23  "  (Calvin).  Sometimes  the  word  is  used  among 
ourselves  in  a  secondary  and  conventional  sense,  as  if  it  meant  a  conclusion, 
but  this  is  a  loose  use  of  the  word,  which  is  never  so  employed  in  Scripture. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Glue   examples  from  Scripture  of  men  taking  their  encouragement  in  prayer 
from  Goi  only. 

2.  A  man  is  sometimes  used  in  Scripture  in  an  inter] ectional  sense,  as  a  final  word 
of  deuout  acclamation ;  sometimes  in  a  confirmatory  sense,  reaffirming  what  has  just 
oven  said ;  sometimes  in  an   aduerbial  sunse,  asserting  the   truth   of  what  is   to   b^ 
immediately  spoken ;  and  sometimes  in  a  substantiue  and  appellative  sense.    Explain, 
and  supply  illustrations. 


SELECTIONS    FROM 

JAMES  NISBET  &  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


THE  WESTMINSTER  ASSEMBLY  :  Its  History  and  Standards.    With  some 

Account  of  English  Puritanism  up  to  the  Meeting  of  the  Assembly. 

Being  the  Baird  Lecture  for  1882.     By  the  Eev.  A.  F.  MITCHELL,  D.D., 

Professor    of    Ecclesiastical    History    in    St.    Andrew's    University. 

Crown  8vo,  cloth,  10s.  6d. 
FOR    THE    WORK    OF    THE    MINISTRY :    A  Manual   of  Homiletical  and 

Pastoral  Theology.     By  W.  GARDEN  BLAIIUE,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  Professor 

of  Apologetics,  and  Ecclesiastical  and  Pastoral  Theology,  New  College, 

Edinburgh.     Crown  8vo,  cloth,  5s. 
VOICES   OF  THE    GOOD    SHEPHERD,   AND   SHADOWS   OF  THE   GREAT 

ROCK.     A  Daily  Book  in  the  Words  of  Scripture,  with  an  Introduction. 

By  the  Eev.  J.  E.  MACDUFF,  D.D.,  author  of  'Morning  and  Night 

Watches.'    16mo,  Is.  6d. 
OVER  THE  HOLY  LAND.     By  the  Eev.  J.  A.  WYLIE,  LL.D.,  author  of  '  The 

History  of  Protestantism.'    Crown  8vo,  cloth,  7s.  6d. 
THD  GOSPEL  IN  PARIS.     By  the  Kev.  Dr.   BERSIER.     Crown  8vo,    cloth, 

7s.  6d. 
ADDRESSES.     By  the  Eev.  FRANCIS  PIGOU,  D.D.,  Vicar  of  Halifax,  author 

of  '  Addresses  to  District  Visitors.'    Crown  8vo,  cloth,  3s.  6d. 
THE  LAW  OF  JEHOVAH.     By  the  Eev.  J.  MATTHEW.      Crown  8vo,   cloth? 

4s.  6d. 
BUNYAN'S    PILGRIM'S    PROGRESS     (Eed    Line    Edition).       (Miniature 

Christian  Classics.)     Crown  32mo,  Is.  cloth;  Is.  6d.  cloth,  gilt  edges. 
THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  SCRIPTURES  :   Their   Claims,  their  History,  and 

their  Authority.     Being  the  Croall  Lecture  for  1882.     By  the  Eev.  A. 

IT.  CHARTERIS,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Biblical  Criticism  in  the  University 

of  Edinburgh.     Demy  8vo,  cloth,  7s.  6d. 
JOHN  THE  APOSTLE.     By  the  Eev.  JOHN  THOMSON.      Crown  8vo,    cloth? 

3s.  6d. 
THE  KINGDOM  OF  ALL-ISRAEL :  Its  History  and  Literature.    By  JAMES 

SIME.    8vo,  cloth,  15s. 
COUNSELS    AND    THOUGHTS    FOR    BELIEVERS.       By    THOMAS    MOOR. 

Crown  8vo,  cloth,  2s.  6d. 
WELLS   OF    V7ATER.     By  Mrs.   SIMPSON,  author   of   'Steps    through    the 

Stream,'  etc.     Square  IGmo,  cloth  elegant,  Is. 
ABRAHAM,  THE  FRIEND  OF  GOD:  A  Study  from  Old  Testament  History. 

By  the  Eev.  J.  OSWALD  DYKES,  D.D.    Post  8vo,  Cs.  cloth. 
A  COMMENTARY  ON  LEVITICUS,  EXPOSITORY  AND  PRACTICAL.     With 

Critical  Notes.    By  the  Eev.  ANDREW  A.  BONAR,  D.D.    8vo,  8s.  Gd. 

cloth. 
HYMNS  OF  FAITH  AND  HOPE.     First,  Second,  and  Third  Series.     By  Eov. 

HORATIUS    BONAR,    D.D.      Crown  8vo,  each  5s.  cloth.     Also  pocket 

editions,  32mo,  each  Is.  Gd.  cloth,  gilt  or  circuit  edges.    The  Three 

Series,  in  a  case,  Gs.  cloth. 

NOONTIDE  AT  SYCHAR ;  or,  The  Story  of  Jacob's  Well.    A  New  Testa 
ment  Chapter  in  Providence   and   Grace.       With  Frontispiece  and 

Vignette.    By  Eev.  J.  E.  MACDUFF,  D.D.    Small  crown  8vo,  3s.  Gd. 

cloth. 
TALES  OF  THE  WARRIOR  JUDGES.      A  Sunday  Book  for  Boys.     By  Eev. 

J.  E.  MACDUFF,  D.D.    Fcap.  8vo,  2s.  6d. 


LONDON:  JAMES  NISBET  &  CO.,  21  BERNERS  STREET,  W. 


BOOKS  FOR  SABBATH -SCHOOL  TEACHERS   AND 
SENIOR  SCHOLARS. 


Brown's  Dictionary  of  the  Bible.     Re\dsed  to  date.    Royal  8vo,  10s.  Gd 
Brown's  Tabernacle,  its  Priests  and  Sacrifices.     Is.  6d.  and  2s.  6d. 
Dexter's  Unerring  Guide  ;    or,  Scripture  Precepts  Topically  Arranged. 

2s.  6cl. 

Eadie's  Lectures  on  the  Bible.     Is. 
Gibson's  Ages  before  Moses.     Crown  8vo,  5s. 
Jacobus'  Notes  on  Genesis.     Crown  8vo,  6s. 
Jacobus'  Notes  on  Matthew.     Crown  8vo,  2s.  Gd. 
Jacobus'  Notes  on  Mark  and  Luke.     Crown  8vo,  2s.  Gd. 
Jacobus'  Notes  on  John.     Crown  8vo,  2s.  Gd. 
Jamieson's  Eastern  Manners  :  Old  Testament.     3s.  Gd. 
Jamieson's  Eastern  Manners  :  New  Testament.     3s.  6d. 
lotto's    Daily    Bible    Illustrations.      With    Notes    by    Dr.    POUTER. 

8  vols.     Subscription  price,  30s.  nctt.     Without  Notes,  20s. 
M'Cheyne's  Memoir  and  Additional  Remains.     2  vols.,  5s.  each. 
Mossman's  Heroes  of  Discovery.     Crown  8vo,  5s. 
Rutherford's  Letters.     Carefully  Revised  by  Professor  SMITH.     5s. 
Smith's  (Dr.  Pye)  Scripture  Testimony  to  Messiah.     2  vols.,  14s. 
Smith's  (Thornley)  History  of  Joseph.     Crown  8vo,  3s.  Gd. 
Smith's  (Thornley)  History  of  Moses.     Crown  Svo,  3s.  Gd. 
Smith's  (Thornley)  History  of  Joshua.     Crown  Svo,  3s.  Gd. 
Whitecross'  Anecdotes  on  the  Old  Testament.     Crown  Svo,  2s.  G  1. 
Whitecross'  Anecdotes  on  the  New  Testament.     Crown  Svo,  2s. 
Whitecross'  Anecdotes  on  the  Shorter  Catechism.     Crown  Svo,  2s. 
Whitecross'  Anecdotes,  Moral  and  Religious.     Crown  Svo,  2s. 


'  For  half  a  century,  if  not  more  [seventy-Jive  years],  Messrs.  Olipliant 
have,  in  addition  to  larger  and  more  important  ivories,  continued  to  issue 
from  the  press  some  of  the  healthiest  juvenile  literature  in  the  language.' — 
REVIEW. 

The  Five  Shilling  Series,  18  kinds. 

The  Three  Shilling  and  Sixpenny  Series,  19  kinds. 
The  Half-Crown  Series,  30  kinds. 

The  Two  Shilling  Series,  47  kinds. 

The  One  Shilling  and  Sixpenny  Series,  54  kinds. 
The  One  Shilling  Series,  56  kinds. 
The  Ninepenny  Series,  21  kinds. 

The  Sixpenny  Series,  48  kinds. 

V  Complete  Catalogues  post  free  on  application. 


EDINBURGH:   OLIPHANT,   ANDERSON,   &   FERRIER. 


MACNIVEN  &  WALLACE,  PUBLISHERS, 

EDINBURGH. 


THE  HOUSEHOLD  LIBRARY  OF  EXPOSITION. 

BRUCE  (A.  B.,  D.D.)— THE  GALILEAN  GOSPEL.     3s.  6d. 
DODS  (MARCUS,  D.D.)— TSAAC,  JACOB,  AND  JOSEPH.     3s.  6d. 

Do.  — THE  PARABLES  OF  OUR  LORD.     3s.  6d. 

DYKES  (J.  OSWALD,  D.D.)— THE  LAW  OF  THE  TEN  WORDS.     3s.  6rl. 
FRASER  (DONALD,  D.D.)— THE  SPEECHES  OF  THE  HOLY  APOSTLES. 

3s.  6d. 
LANG   (J.  MARSHALL,  D.D.) — THE  LAST  SUPPER  OF  OUR  LORD. 

3s.  6d. 
MACLAREN  (ALEX.,  D.D.)— THE  LIFE  OF  DAVID  AS  REFLECTED  IN 

THE  PSALMS.    3s.  Gd. 

NICOLL  (W.  R.,  M.A.)— THE  LAMB  OF  GOD.    2s.  6d. 
PARKER  (JOSEPH,  D.D.)— ADAM,  NOAH,  AND  ABRAHAM.     3s. 
STANFORD  (CHARLES,  D.D.)— THE  LORD'S  PRAYER.     3s.  6d.  - 

EVANGELICAL  SUCCESSION  LECTURES  (THE).     First 

and  Second  Series.    5s.  each. 
EVANGELICAL  CLASSICS:  ARCHBISHOP  LEIGHTON. 

A  Selection  from  his  Writings.     By  E.  BLAIR,  D.D.     2s.  6d. 
MINE  OWN  PEOPLE.    By  LOUISA  M.  GRAY.     Crown  8vo,  6s. 


BIBLE     CLASS     PRIMERS. 

EDITED   BY  PROFESSOR  SALMOND,  D.D. 
With  Maps,  cloth,  8d. ;  paper,  6d. 

'  For  fulness  of  information,  clearness  of  consideration,  and  for.  a  complete 
and  comprehensive  view  of  the  subject  of  which  they  treat,  they  are  as  far  as 
we  know  unique.'— Congregationalist. 

LIFE  OF  DAVID.     By  the  late  Rev.  PETER  THOMSON,  M.A. 

LIFE  OF  MOSES.    By  the  Rev.  JAMES  IVERACH,  M.A. 

LIFE  OF  PAUL.     By  the  Rev.  J.  PATON  GLOAG,  D.D. 

THE  KINGS  OF  ISRAEL.     By  the  Rev.  TV.  WALTER,  M.A. 

THE  KINGS  OF  JUDAH.     By  the  Rev.  Professor  GIVEN,  Ph.D. 

JOSHUA  AND  THE  CONQUEST.     By  the  Rev.  Professor  CROSKERY. 

HISTORY  OF  THE  REFORMATION.     By  the  Rev.  Prof.  WITH  K  now 

BIBLE    WORDS    AND    PHRASES.      By    CHARLES    MICHIE,    M.A. 
Foolscap  8vo,  cloth,  Is. 

SCOTTISH  CHURCH  AND  UNIVERSITY  ALMANAC. 

Published  Annually,  price  1.9. 
MACNIVEN  &  WALLACE,  132  PRINCES  STREET,  EDINBUKGH. 


Just  published,  demy  8 vo,  cloth,  price  9s. , 

History  of  the  Canon  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  in  the  Christian  Church.  By 
EDWARD  EEUSS,  University  of  Strasburg.  Translated  by  Eev.  DAVID 
HUNTKR,  Partick,  Glasgow. 


WORKS  BY  REV.  HUGH  MARTIN,  D.D. 

Second  Edition,  demy  8vo,  cloth,  7s.  6d., 

The  Atonement  in  its  Relation  to  the  Covenant,  the  Priesthood,  and  the 
Intercession  of  Our  Lord. 

Demy  8vo,  cloth,  7s.  6d., 
The  Shadow  of  Calvary :  Gethsemane,  the  Arrest,  the  TriaL 

Second  Edition,  demy  8vo,  7s.  Gd., 
The  Prophet  Jonah :  His  Character  and  Mission  to  Nineveh. 


Demy  8vo,  cloth,  with  Illustrations,  price  7s.  6d., 

Lectures  and  Sermons  by  Martyrs,  containing  Sermons  and  Lectures  by 
Kichard  Cameron,  Alexander  Peden,  Donald  Cargill,  William  Guthrie, 
Michael  Bruce,  Alexander  Shields,  John  Livingstone,  John  "Well  wood, 
John  Welch,  John  Guthrie.  With  Preface  by  JOHN  HOWIE,  of  Looh- 
goin;  and  brief  Biographical  Notices  of  the  Authors  of  the  Sermons,  by 
the  Rev.  JAMES  KKBR,  Greenock.  Illustrations— Grassmarket  of  Edin 
burgh,  Martyrs'  Monument,  Greyfriars,  and  other  places  and  scenes 
associated  with  the  Covenanting  Struggle. 

Crown  8vo,  689  pp.,  price  7s.  6d., 
The  Land  of  the  Morning :  An  Account  of  Japan  and  its  People,  based  on 

a  Four  Years'  Residence  in  that  Country,  including  Ti*avels  into  the 
remotest  Parts  of  the  Interior.  By  WILLIAM  GRAY  DIXON,  M.A., 
formerly  Professor  of  Engineering,  Tokiyo.  With  Twenty-one  Illus 
trations  and  a  Map. 

Fourth  Edition,  in  one  volume,  crown  8vo,  cloth,  price  6s., 
History  of  the  Westminster  Assembly  of  Divines.     By  Professor  Wm.  M. 
HETHEEUXGTON,  D.D.,  Glasgow.    Edited  by  ROBERT  WILLIAMSON,  D.D., 
Ascog. 

Just  published,  crown  8vo,  357  pp.,  price  5s., 
The  Story  of  Daniel :  His  Life  and  Times.    By  P.  H.  Hunter. 

Crown  8vo,  cloth,  price  4s.  6d., 

Modern  Missions  and  Culture :  Their  Mutual  Relations.  By  Dr  Gustav 
WARNECK  ROTHENSCHINNBACH.  Translated  from  the  German  by 
THOMAS  SMITH,  D.D.,  New  College,  Edinburgh. 

Two  Volumes,  demy  8vo,  cloth,  price  3s.  6d.  each, 

Modern  Scottish  Pulpit,  containing  Fifty-two  Sermons  by  Eminent  Pres 
byterian  Divines. 

Reprint  of  an  Important  Work  on  Baptism* 

Crown  8vo,  cloth,  price  2s.  6d., 

Candid  Reasons  for  Renouncing  the  Principles  of  Antipsedobaptism.  By 
PETER  EDWARDS. 

Crown  8vo,  cloth,  178  pp.,  with  Portrait,  price  2s., 
Life  of  Robert  Smith  Candlish,  D.D.,  Minister  of  Free  St.  George's  Church, 

and  Principal  of  the  New  College,  Edinburgh.     By  JEAN  L.  WATSON. 


EDINBURGH:  JAS.  GEMMELL,  10,  11,  AND  15  GEORGE  IV.  BRIDGE. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


Just  published,  in  Two  Volumes,  8vo  (1600  pages),  price  28s., 

THE  DOCTRINE  OF  SACRED  SCRIPTURE, 

A  CRITICAL,  HISTORICAL,  AND  DOGMATIC  INQUIRY  INTO  THE 
ORIGIN  AND  NATURE  OF  THE  OLD  AND  NEW  TESTAMENTS. 

BY  GEORGE  T.  LADD,  D.D., 

PROFESSOR   OF  MENTAL   AND  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY,  YALE   COLLEGE. 

'Dr.  Ladd  has  given  years  to  this  labour  of  love,  and  he  has  given  us  a 
work  which  is  not  only  a  mine  of  learning,  but  it  is  also  a  treasure-house  of 
sanctified  thought.  ...  A  most  useful  and  helpful  treatise ;  a  work  which 
will  largely  help  to  dispose  of  many  of  the  questions  which  try  the  faith  and 
disturb  the  peace  of  Christian  men.' — Daily  Review. 

'  A  work  which  is  not  only  one  of  the  most  copious,  but  is  also  one  of  the 
most  profound,  erudite,  and  able  of  the  theological  productions  of  the  time. 
It  brings  together,  in  one  complete  view,  a  clearly  written  and  ripely  digested 
representation,  from  the  hand  of  a  master,  of  what  is  known  respecting  the 
primitive  documents  of  the  Christian  religion.' — New  York  Tribune. 


Just  publibhed,  in  crown  8vo,  price  6s., 

STUDIES  IN  THE  CHRISTIAN  EVIDENCES. 

BY  ALEXANDER  MAIR,  D.D. 

CONTENTS.— Chap.  I.  Christianity  and  Physical  Science.  II.  Of  Intellectual 
Diflkmlties  in  Keligion.  III.  Revelation  and  Inspiration.  IV.  Authenticity 
of  the  New  Testament.  V.  Testimony  of  the  Unquestioned  Epistles  of  Paul. 
VI.  The  Christian  Miracles.  VII.  Direct  Personal  Testimony  to  Miracles 
in  the  New  Testament.  VIII.  The  Resurrection  of  Christ.  IX.  Arguments 
from  the  Unique  Personality  of  Christ.  X.  Important  Converging  Lines,  and 
the  Theory  of  Probabilities.  XI.  Christianity  proving  Itself  by  the  Survival 
of  the  Fittest.  Appendix. 

'  The  book  is  unquestionably  able.  It  bears  evidence  of  extensive  reading 
on  the  questions  discussed,  shows  great  care  in  the  treatment  of  them,  and 
is  marked  by  clearness  of  expression,  vigorous  thought,  and  much  logical 
power.  .  .  .  Taken  as  a  whole,  the  volume  is  one  of  great  value.' — North 
British  Daily  Mail. 

4  This  is  one  of  the  very  best  treatises  of  modern  times  upon  a  subject  that 
can  never  fail  to  be  important,  no  less  tli&n  interesting,  the  simple  style  of 
which  commends  it  to  the  reader's  immediate  attention.' — Belt's  Weekly 
Messscnger. 


T.  and  T.  Claries  Publications. 


Just  published,  in  crown  8vo,  price  6s., 

CHRISTIAN  CHARITY  IN  THE  ANCIENT 
CHURCH. 

BY    G.   UHLHORN,   D.D. 

'  The  historical  knowledge  this  work  displays  is  immense,  and  the  whole 
subject  is  wrought  out  with  great  care  and  pkill;  it  is  a  most  readable,  delight 
ful,  and  instructive  volume.' — Evangelical  Christendom. 

'This  is  a  work  of  intrinsic  worth  and  world-wide  interest.' — Homilisl. 

Just  published,  in  demy  8vo,  price  10s.  6d., 

THE    LORD'S    PRAYER: 

8  Practical  jiEefci'tatiotu 

BY    REV.    NEWMAN    HALL,    LL.B. 

*  We  congratulate  the  author  on  this  excellent  work.  There  is  no  better 
practical  exposition  of  the  Lord's  prayer  in  our  language.' — Outlook. 

-T ~~~~ ~~~ 

Just  published,  in  demy  8vo,  price  9s., 

OUTLINES  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  CHRISTIAN 
DOCTRINE. 

BY  REV.  T.  G.  CRIPPEN. 

In  demy  8vo,  price  9s., 
A  CHRONOLOGICAL  AND  GEOGRAPHICAL  INTRODUCTION  TO 

THE    LIFE    OF    CHRIST. 

BY    C.    E.    CASPARI. 

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  GERMAN,  WITH  ADDITIONAL  NOTES,  BY 

M.  J.  EVANS,  B.A. 
Revised  by  the  Author. 

'  The  work  is  handy  and  well  suited  for  the  use  of  the  student.  It  gives 
him,  in  very  reasonable  compass,  and  in  well-digested  forms,  a  great  deal  of 
information  respecting  the  dates  and  outward  circumstances  of  our  Lord's 
life,  and  materials  for  forming  a  judgment  upon  the  various  disputed  points 
arising  out  of  them.' — Guardian. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


HISTORY  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  CHURCH. 

BY  PHILIP  SCHAFF,  D.D. 
&  $cfo  (Edition,  £fj0r0tigjjlg  Kebtsrtf  anto  (Efnlarjjrti. 

APOSTOLIC  CHRISTIANITY,  A.D.  1-100. 
In  Two  Divisions,  ex.  demy,  21s. 

ANTE-NICENE  CHRISTIANITY,  A.D.  100-325. 

In  Two  Divisions,  ex.  demy,  21s. 

'  No  student,  and  indeed  no  critic,  can  with  fairness  overlook  a  work  like 
the  present,  written  with  such  evident  candour  and,  at  tlie  same  time,  with  so 
thorough  a  knowledge  of  the  sources  of  early  Christian  history.'  —  Scotsman. 

'It  is  a  work  of  almost  unequalled  merit.  This  we  say  notwithstanding 
our  knowledge  of  many  other  works  on  the  same  theme.  It  is  written  with 
the  wisdom,  calmness,  and  learning  for  which  the  works  of  Dr.  Schaff  are 
justly  celebrated.'  —  Daily  Review. 

Just  published,  in  demy  8vo,  price  9s., 

LECTURES  ON  PAUL'S  EPISTLES  TO  THE 
THE88ALONIAH8 

BY    JOHN    HUTCHISON,    D.D. 
Just  published,  in  crown  8vo,  price  2s.  6d., 

THE  WORK  OF   THE  HOLY  SPIRIT  IN  MAN. 


BY    PASTOR    G.    TOPHEL, 

GENEVA. 

'  An  admirable  book  on  a  subject  of  the  deepest  importance.  We  do  not 
remember  any  work  on  this  theme  that  is  more  impressive,  or  seems  more 
fitted  for  general  usefulness.'  —  British  Messenger. 

In  crown  8vo,  Fifth  Edition,  price  6s., 

THE  TRIPARTITE  NATURE  OF  MAN: 

SPIRIT,  SOUL,  AND  BODY. 

Applied  to  Illustrate  and  Explain  the  Doctrines  of  Original  Sin,  the  New 
Birth,  the  Disembodied  State,  and  the  Spiritual  Body. 

BY  REV.  J.  B.  HEARD,  M.A. 

'  The  author  has  got  a  striking  and  consistent  theory.  Whether  agreeing 
or  disagreeing  with  that  theory,  it  is  a  book  which  any  student  of  the  Bible 
may  read  with  pleasure.'  —  Guardian. 

'An  elaborate,  ingenious,  and  very  able  book.'  —  London  Quarterly  Review. 

4  The  subject  is  discussed  with  much  ability  and  learning,  and  the  style  is 
sprightly  and  readable.  It  is  candid  in  its  tone,  and  original  both  in  thought 
and  illustration.'  —  Wesleyan  Methodist  Magazine. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


In  Three  Volumes,  8vo,  price  31s.  6d., 
Volumes  I.  and  II.  now  ready. 

THE    LIFE     OF     CHRIST. 

BY    DR.    BERNHARD    WEISS, 

PROFESSOR  OF  THEOLOGY,  BERLIX. 

{ This  book  seems  destined  to  hold  a  very  distinguished,  if  not  absolutely 
unique  place  in  the  criticism  of  the  New  Testament.  Its  fearless  search  after 
truth,  its  independence  of  spirit,  its  extent  of  research,  its  thoughtful  and 
discriminating  tone,  must  secure  for  it  a  very  high  reputation.' — Congregationalist. 


BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 

In  Two  Volumes,  8vo,  price  2 Is., 

BIBLICAL    THEOLOGY    OF    THE    NEW 
TESTAMENT. 

'The  work  which  this  volume  completes  is  one  of  no  ordinary  strength  and 
acumen.  It  is  an  exposition  of  the  books  of  the  New  Testament  arranged 
scientifically,  that  is,  according  to  the  authorship  and  development,  it  is  the 
ripe  fruit  of  many  years  of  New  Testament  exegesis  and  theological  study. 
.  .  .  The  book  is  in  every  way  a  notable  one.' — British  Quarterly  Review. 

In  Four  Volumes,  8vo,  price  £2,  2s., 

A    SI  STEM    OF    CHRISTIAN    DOCTRINE. 

BY  DR.  I.  A.  DORNER, 

PROFESSOR   OF   THEOLOGY,    BERLIN. 

'  The  work  has  many  and  great  excellences,  and  is  really  indispensable  to 
all  who  would  obtain  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  great  problems  of 
theology.  It  is  a  great  benefit  to  English  students  that  it  should  be  made 
accessible  to  them  in  their  own  language,  and  in  a  form  so  elegant  and  con 
venient.' — Literary  Churchman. 

In  Three  Volumes,  8vo,  price  31s.  6d., 

CHRISTIAN    ETHICS. 

BY  DR.  H.  MARTENSEN, 

BISHOP  OF  SEELAND. 

^Translates  from  t{je  ^utfjar's  German  (Edition. 

VOLUME  I.— GENERAL  ETHICS. 

II.— INDIVIDUAL  ETHICS. 
„     III.— SOCIAL  ETHICS. 

'It  is  no  ordinary  book,  and  we  commend  it  to  the  study  of  all  who  are 
interested  in  Christian  Ethics,  as  one  of  the  most  able  treatises  on  the  subject 
which  has  ever  yet  appeared.' — Watchman. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


HERZOG'S    ENCYCLOPAEDIA. 


In  Three  Volumes,  Imperial  8yo,  Pi-ice  24s.  each. 
VOLUME  III.     In  the  Press. 

ENCYCLOPAEDIA 

OR 

DICTIONARY 

OF 

BIBLICAL,    HISTORICAL,   DOCTRINAL,  AND 
PRACTICAL  THEOLOGY. 

Based  on  the  Real-Enoyklopadie  of  Herzog,  Plitt,  and  Hauck. 

EDITED  BY 

PROFESSOR  PHILIP  SCHAFF,  D.D.,  LL.D., 

UNION  THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY,  NEW  YORK. 


4  It  is  certain  that  this  Encyclopaedia  will  fill  a  place  in  our  theological 
literature,  in  which,  for  a  long  time,  it  will  have  no  rival.' — Prof.  HODGK, 
Princeton. 

1  This  Encyclopaedia  is  exceedingly  well  done.  .  .  .  We  hope  that  this  new 
enterprise  will  be  successful,  and  that  no  minister's  library  will  long  remain 
without  a  copy  of  this  work.  ...  To  people  in  the  country,  far  from  libraries, 
who  cannot  lay  their  hands  on  books,  a  work  of  this  kind  would  simply  be 
invaluable.' — Daily  Review. 

'We  have  been  delighted  with  its  comprehensiveness.  We  have  never 
failed  to  find  what  we  wanted.' — Edinburgh  Courant. 

4  Herzog's  Protestant  Encyclopaedia,  to  be  condensed  into  three  volumes  by 
the  skilful  hands  of  Prof.  Schaff.'— Academy. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


Just  published,  in  demy  8vo,  price  9s., 

THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT. 

(The  Ninth  Series  of  the  Cunningham  Lectures.) 

BY  GEORGE  SMEATON,  D.D., 

r  Professor  of  Exegetical  Theology,  New  College,  Edinburgh. 

'The  theological  student  will  be  benefited  by  a  careful  perusal  of  this 
purvey,  and  that  not  for  the  moment,  but  through  all  his  future  life.' — 
Watchman. 

'  Very  cordially  do  we  commend  these  able  and  timely  lectures  to  the  notice 
of  our  readers.  Every  theological  student  should  master  them.' — Baptist 
Magazine. 

'It  is  a  pleasure  to  meet  with  a  work  like  this.  .  .  .  Our  brief  account, 
we  trust,  will  induce  the  desire  to  study  this  work.' — Dickinson's  Theological 
Quarterly. 

BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 
'  In  demy  8vo,  Second  Edition,  price  10s.  6d., 

THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  ATONEMENT. 

As  TAUGHT  BY  CHRIST  HIMSELF  ;  OR,  THE  SAYINGS  OF  JESUS  ON  THE 
ATONEMENT  EXEGETICALLY  EXPOUNDED  AND  CLASSIFIED. 


*  We  attach  very  great  value  to  this  seasonable  and  scholarly  production. 
The  idea  of  the  work  is  most  happy,  and  the  execution  of  it  worthy  of  the 
idea.  On  a  scheme  of  truly  Baconian  exegetical  induction,  he  presents  us 
with  a  complete  view  of  the  various  positions  or  propositions  which  a  full 
and  sound  doctrine  of  the  Atonement  embraces.' — British  and  Foreign 
Evangelical  Review. 

In  One  Volume,  8vo,  Second  Edition,  price  12s., 

FINAL     CAUSES. 

BY  PAUL  JANET,  Member  of  the  Institute,  Paris. 
TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  FRENCH  BY  WILLIAM  AFFLECK,  B.D. 


'  This  very  learned,  accurate,  and,  within  its  prescribed  limits,  exhaustive 
work.  .  .  .  The  book  as  a  whole  abounds  in  matter  of  the  highest  interest, 
and  is  a  model  of  learning  and  judicious  treatment.' — Guardian. 

'Illustrated  and  defended  with  an  ability  and  learning  which  must  command 
the  reader's  admiration.' — Dublin  Review. 

'A  great  contribution  to  the  literature  of  this  subject.  JI.  Janet  has 
mastered  the  conditions  of  the  problem,  is  at  home  in  the  literature  of  science 
and  philosophy;  ...  in  clearness,  vigour,  and  depth  it  has  been  seldom 
equalled,  and  more  seldom  excelled,  in  philosophical  literature.' — Spectator. 

'A  wealth  of  scientific  knowledge  and  a  logical  acumen  which  will  win  the 
admiration  of  every  reader.' — Church  Quarterly  Review. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


In  demy  8vo,  Third  Edition,  price  10s.  6d., 

THE    TRAINING    OF    THE    TWELVE; 

OR, 

EXPOSITION  OF  PASSAGES  IN  THE  GOSPELS  EXHIBITING 

THE  TWELVE  DISCIPLES  OF  JESUS  UNDER 

DISCIPLINE  FOR  THE  APOSTLESHIP. 

BY 

A.  B.  BRUCE,  D.D., 

PROFESSOR  OF  DIVINITY,  FREE  CHURCH  COLLEGE,  GLASGOW. 


*  Here  we  have  a  really  great  book  on  an  important,  large,  and  attractive 
subject — a  book  full  of  loving,  wholesome,  profound  thoughts  about  the 
fundamentals  of  Christian  faith  and  practice.' — British  and  Foreign  Evangeli 
cal  Review. 

1  It  is  some  five  or  six  years  since  this  work  first  made  its  appearance,  and 
now  that  a  second  edition  has  been  called  for,  the  author  has  taken  the  oppor 
tunity  to  make  some  alterations  which  are  likely  to  render  it  still  more  accept 
able.  Substantially,  however,  the  book  remains  the  same,  and  the  hearty 
commendation  with  which  we  noted  its  first  issue  applies  to  it  at  least  as  much 
now.' — Rock. 


BY     THE     SAME     AUTHOR. 


In  demy  8vo,  Second  Edition,  price  10s.  6d., 

THE   HUMILIATION    OF    CHRIST, 

IN  ITS  PHYSICAL,  ETHICAL,  AND  OFFICIAL  ASPECTS. 


SIXTH  SERIES  OF  CUNNINGHAM  LECTURES. 


'  These  lectures  are  able  and  deep-reaching  to  a  degree  not  often  found  in 
the  religious  literature  of  the  day;  withal,  they  are  fresh  and  suggestive.  .  .  . 
The  learning  and  the  deep  and  sweet  spirituality  of  this  discussion  will  com 
mend  it  to  many  faithful  students  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.' — Congrega- 
tionalist. 

1  We  have  not  for  a  long  time  met  with  a  work  so  fresh  and  suggestive  as 
this  of  Professor  Bruce.  .  .  .  We  do  not  know  where  to  look  at  our  English 
Universities  for  a  treatise  so  calm,  logical,  and  scholarly.' — English  Independent. 


10  T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 

DR.    LUTHARDT'S   WORKS. 

In  Three  handsome  crown  Svo  Volumes,  price  6s.  each. 

1  We  do  not  know  any  volumes  so  suitable  in  these  times  for  young 
men  entering  on  life,  or,  let  us  say,  even  for  the  library  of  a  pastor 
called  to  deal  with  such,  than  the  three  volumes  of  this  series.  We 
commend  the  whole  of  them  with  the  utmost  cordial  satisfaction. 
They  are  altogether  quite  a  specialty  in  our  literature.'—  Weekly  Review. 

Apologetic  Lectures  on  the  Fundamental  Truths 
of  Christianity. 

Sixth  Edition. 

BY  C.  E.  LUTHARDT,  D.D.,  LEIPZIG. 

Apologetic  Lectures  on  the  Saving  Truths  of 
Christianity. 

Fourth  Edition. 


Apologetic  Lectures  on  the  Moral  Truths  of 
Christianity. 

Third  Edition. 
In  Three  Volumes,  Svo,  price  31*.  6d, 

St.  John's  Gospel  Described  and  Explained 
according  to  its  Peculiar  Character. 

In  demy  Svo,  price  9s., 

St.  John  the  Author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel. 

Translated  and  the  Literature  enlarged  by  C.  R.  GREGORY,  Leipzig. 


In  crown  Svo,  5s., 

Luthardt,  Kahnis,  and  Bruckner. 

THE  CHURCH  :  Its  Origin,  its  History,  and  its  Present  Position. 

'A  comprehensive  review  of  this  sort,  done  by  able  hands,  is  both  instruc 
tive  and  suggestive.' — Record. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications.  11 

Just  published,  in  demy  4to,  Third  Edition,  price  25s., 

BIBLICO-THEOLOGICAL  LEXICON  OF  NEW 
TESTAMENT    GREEK. 

BY  HERMANN  CREMER,  D.D. 

TRANSLATED    FROM   THE    GERMAN    OF   THE    SECOND   EDITION 

(32Ettf)  ^tifcitional  iiHattrr  anti  Corrections  fog  fyt  Author) 

BY  WILLIAM  URWICK,  M.A. 

'Dr.  Cremer's  work  is  highly  and  deservedly  esteemed  in  Germany.  It 
gives  with  care  and  thoroughness  a  complete  history,  as  far  as  it  goes,  of  each 
word  and  phrase  that  it  deals  with.  .  .  .  Dr.  Cremer's  explanations  are  most 
lucidly  set  out.' — Guardian. 

4  It  is  hardly  possible  to  exaggerate  the  value  of  this  work  to  the  student  of 
the  Greek  Testament.  .  .  .  The  translation  is  accurate  and  idiomatic,  and  the 
additions  to  the  later  edition  are  considerable  and  important.' — Church  Bells. 

'We  very  heartily  commend  this  goodly  volume  to  students  of  Biblical 
literature.' — Evangelical  Magazine. 

KEIL  AND  DELITZSCH'S 

INTRODUCTION  TO  AND  COMMENTARIES 
ON  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 

In  27  Volumes,  demy  8vo. 

MESSRS.   CLARK  have  resolved  to  offer  complete  sets  of  this  work  at  the 
Original  Subscription  Price  of  £7,  2s.      Single  volumes  may  be  had,  price 

10s.  6d. 

1  This  series  is  one  of  great  importance  to  the  Biblical  scholar ;  and  as 
regards  its  general  execution,  it  leaves  little  or  nothing  to  be  desired.'—  Edin 
burgh  Review. 

In  crown  8vo,  price  5s., 

THE    LEVITICAL    PRIESTS. 

A  CONTRIBUTION  TO  THE  CRITICISM  OF  THE  PENTATEUCH. 
BY  SAMUEL  IVES  CURTISS,  JR., 

PROFESSOR  OF  THEOLOGY,  CHICAGO. 

'A  real  contribution  to  the  criticism  of  the  Ppntateuch,  and  a  storehouse 
of  arguments  against  that  neological  school  which  expends  its  confessedly 
great  powers  in  splitting  hairs  and  weaving  sophistries,  and  which  tries  by 
arrogant  assertion  to  compensate  for  weakness  of  proof.'— Literary  Churchman. 


12  T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


PROFESSOR    DELITZSCH'S    WORKS. 


Just  published,  in  crown  %vo,  price  4$.  6d., 

OLD    TESTAMENT 

HISTORY    OF    REDEMPTION, 

LECTURES 

By    PROFESSOR    DELITZSCH. 

^Translate**  fr0m  fKanugcript  Notes 

BY 

PKOFESSOR  S.  I.  CURTISS. 


'  We  have  read  this  book  with  great  pleasure  and  with  equal  profit.  It  is 
written  by  the  hand  of  a  master,  and  contains  multum  in  parvoS — Watchman. 

'We  prize  this  work  as  a  devout  attempt  of  a  profound  and  profoundly 
spiritual  mind  to  trace  anew  through  Old  Testament  History  the  central 
truths  of  the  Christian  faith.' — British  and  Foreign  Evangelical  Review. 

In  One  Volume,  8vo,  price  12s., 

A    SYSTEM    OF   BIBLICAL    PSYCHOLOGY. 

BY  F.    DELITZSCH,    D.D. 

'  This  admirable  volume  ought  to  be  carefully  read  by  every  thinking 
clergyman.  There  is  a  growing  gnosticism  which  requires  to  be  met  by 
philosophical  explanations  of  the  Christian  system,  quite  as  much  as,  and 
even  more  than,  by  dogmatic  statements  of  received  truths ;  and  we  know  no 
work  which  is  better  calculated  as  a  guide  to  minds  already  settled  on  lines 
of  sound  theological  principle,  than  the  one  we  are  about  to  bring  before  the 
notice  of  our  readers.  —Literary  Churchman. 

Just  published,  in  crown  8vo,  price  4s., 

OUTLINES    OF   BIBLICAL    PSYCHOLOGY. 

BY     J.     T.     BECK,      D.D., 

PROF.  ORD.  THEOL.,  TUBINGEN. 

Craitslattfj  from  tfje  tEljiru'  Enlarged  aitti  (JTorrectelr  (Scrmatt  (Edition,  1877. 

'  The  smallness  of  the  work  should  not  lead  to  its  being  undervalued ;  it 
well  deserves  a  place  side  by  side  with  Delitzsch  and  Heard.  .  .  .  We  do 
warmly  recommend  this  volume  as  one  of  the  most  fresh  and  valuable  contri 
butions  to  theological  literature  of  recent  date.' — Wesleyan  Methodist  Maga 
zine. 

'  We  quite  endorse  Bishop  Ellicott's  statement  that,  for  many  readers,  Beck's 
will  be  found  to  be  the  most  handy  manual  on  the  subject.' — Church  Bells. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


13 


•  I  feel  satisfied  that  if  the  whole  is  completed  after  the  same  manner, 
it  will  be  the  Commentary  par  excellence  in  the  English  language. 
Indeed,  as  a  Commentary  for  popular  use,  I  know  nothing  equal  to  it  in 
any  language.'— Kev.  Professor  Lindsay  Alexander,  D.D. 


In  Four  Volumes,  imperial  8vo,  handsomely  bound,  price  18s.  each, 

COMMENTARY  ON   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

With  Illustrations  and  Maps. 
EDITED  BY  PHILIP   SCHAFF,  D.D.,  LL.D. 


Volume  I. 

THE  SYNOPTICAL  GOSPELS.  By 
PHILIP  SCHAFF,  D.D.,  and 
MATTHEW  B.  RIDDLE,  D.D. 

Volume  IIL    (Just  Published.') 
ROMANS.    By  PHILIP  SCHAFF,  D.D., 

and  MATTHEW  B.  KIDDLE,  D.D. 
CORINTHIANS.    By  Principal  DAVID 

BROWN,  D.D. 
GALATIANS.      By   PHILIP   SCHAFF, 

D.D. 
EPHESIANS.       By     MATTHEW     B. 

KIDDLE,  D.D. 
PHILIPPIANS.       By     J.     RAWSON 

LUMBY,  D.D. 
COLOSSIANS.      By     MATTHEW     B. 

RIDDLE,  D.D. 
THESSALONIANS.  By  MARCUS  DODS, 

D.D. 
TIMOTHY.    Py  the  Very  Rev.  Dean 

PLUMPTRE. 

TITUS.     By  J.  OSWALD  DYKES,  D.D. 
PHILEMON.    By  J.  RAWSON  LUMBY, 

D.D. 


Volume  II. 

ST.  JOHN'S  GOSPEL.  By  W.  MILLI- 
GAN,  D.D.,  and  W.  F.  MOULTON, 
D.D. 

THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.    By 

the    Very   Rev.   Dean   HOWSON 
and  Rev.  Canon  SPENCE. 


HEBREWS. 
D.D. 

JAMES. 
D.D. 


Volume  IV. 

By    JOSEPH    ANGUS, 

By    PATON    J.    GLOAG, 
By  S.  D.  F.  SAL- 
By  WILLIAM 


I.  and  II.  PETER. 

MOND,  D.D. 

I.,  II.,  and  III.  JOHN. 
B.  POPE,  D.D. 

JUDE.    By  JOSEPH  ANGUS,  D.D. 

REVELATION.     By  WILLIAM  MILLI- 
GAN,  D.D. 


Maps  and  Plans— Professor  ARNOLD  GUYOT. 
Illustrations— W.  M.  THOMSON,  D.D.,  Author  of '  The  Land  and  the  Book.' 


From  'The  Church  Quarterly  Review.' 

'  The  annotations  are  clear  and  intelligible,  and  have  a  certain  definiteuess 
and  directness  of  tone  which  impresses  us  favourably,  and,  we  think,  will  be 
generally  liked.  .  .  .  Every  reader  must  gain  something  from  it' 

From  'The  Literary  Churchman.' 

'From  so  many  contributors  we  are  led  confidently  to  expect  a  well-con 
sidered,  careful,  and  edifyiug  comment,  constructed  with  sufficient  learning 
and  Biblical  knowledge.  And  this  confidence  will  not  be  disappointed  on 
examination.  .  .  .  We  regard  the  work  as  well  done,  and  calculated  both  1o 
instruct  and  to  benefit  those  who  consult  it.  The  printing,  paper,  illustra 
tions,  and  all  such  matters  are  of  unusual  beauty  and  excellence.' 


14  T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


WORKS  BY  PATON  J.  GLOAG,  P.P. 

In  crown  8vo,  price  7s.  6d., 

THE    MESSIANIC    PROPHECIES 

(Being  the  '  Baird  Lecture '  for  1879). 

'We  regard  Dr.  Gloag's  book  as  a  valuable  contribution  to  theological 
literature.  We  have  not  space  to  give  the  extended  notice  which  its  intrinsic 
excellence  demands,  and  must  content  ourselves  with  cordially  recommending 
it.'— Spectator. 

'For  its  thoroughness  it  is  a  perfect  pleasure  to  get  hold  of  such  a  book; 
and  amid  the  shallow  scepticism  which  prevails,  we  hail  its  appearance  as  a 
much  needed  antidote,  and  a  strong  and  convincing  demonstration  of  the 
faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints.' — English  Independent. 

In  demy  8vo,  price  12s., 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PAULINE  EPISTLES. 

'  This  introduction  to  St.  Paul's  Epistles  is  a  capital  book,  full,  scholarly 
and  clear;  ...  no  difficulty  is  shirked  or  overlooked,  but  dealt  with  fairly 
and  in  an  evangelical  spirit.  To  ministers  and  theological  students  it  will  be 
of  great  value.' — Evangelical  Magazine. 

'A  safe  and  complete  guide  to  the  results  of  modern  criticism.' — Literary 
Churchman. 

1  Altogether  it  is  one  of  the  most  satisfactory  books  we  have  on  the  themes 
it  discusses.' — Freeman. 

In  Two  Volumes,  demy  8vo,  price  21s., 

A    CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL    COMMENTARY 

ON  THE 

ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 

'  The  Commentary  of  Dr.  Gloag  I  procured  on  its  first  appearance,  and  have 
examined  it  with  special  care.  For  my  purposes  I  have  found  it  unsurpassed 
by  any  similar  work  in  the  English  language.  It  shows  a  thorough  mastery 
of  the  material,  philology,  history,  and  literature  pertaining  to  this  range  of 
study,  and  a  skill  in  the  use  of  this  knowledge  which  (if  I  have  any  right  to 
judge) place  it  in  the  first  class  of  modern  expositions.' — H.  B.  HACKETT,  D.D. 

'  Dr.  Gloag's  work  is  very  acceptable.  .  .  .  The  volumes  are  scholarly, 
earnest,  trustworthy,  and  supply  materials  for  the  refutation  of  the  specula 
tions  of  the  critical  school.' — British  Quarh  rly  Review. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications.  15 

In  crown  8vo,  price  6s., 

SERMONS    FOR    THE    CHRISTIAN    YEAR. 

ADVENT-TRINITY. 
BY  PROFESSOR  ROTHE. 

'  The  volume  is  rich  in  noble  thoughts  and  wholesome  lessons.' — Watchman. 

( The  sermons  before  us  are  wonderfully  simple  in  construction  and 
expression,  and  at  the  same  time  remarkably  fresh  and  suggestive.  ...  It 
is  a  mind  of  real  keenness,  singularly  pure  and  gentle,  and  of  lolty  spirituality, 
that  expresses  itself  in  these  discourses.' — Weekly  Review. 

In  Two  Volumes,  large  crown  8vo,  price  7s.  6d.  each, 

THE     YEAR     OF     SALVATION: 

WORDS  OF  LIFE  FOR  EVERY  DAY. 

A    BOOK    OF  HOUSEHOLD    DEVOTION. 

BY  J.  J.  VAN  OOSTERZEE,  D.D. 

'  This  charming  and  practical  book  of  household  devotion  will  be  welcomed 
on  acount  of  its  rave  intrinsic  value,  as  one  of  the  most  practical  devotional 
books  ever  published.' — Standard. 

BY   THE   SAME   AUTHOR. 

In  crown  8vo,  price  6s^ 

MOSES:    A    BIBLICAL    STUDY. 

*  Our  author  has  seized,  as  with  the  instinct  of  a  master,  the  great  salien* 
points  in  the  life  and  work  of  Moses,  and  portrayed  the  various  elements  of 
his  character  with  vividness  and  skill.  .  .  .  The  work  will  at  once  take  its 
place  among  our  ablest  and  most  valuable  expository  and  practical  discourses.' 
— Baptist  Magazine. 

In  crown  8vo,  price  4s.  6d., 

THE    WORLD    OF    PRAYER; 

OB,    PRAYER    IN    RELATION    TO     PERSONAL    RELIGION. 
BY  BISHOP  MONRAD. 

'  English  readers  are  greatly  indebted  to  Mr.  Banks  for  his  translation  of 
this  work :  he  has  rendered  available  to  them  a  book  of  devotional  reading 
which  admirably  combines  the  truest  Christian  mysticism  with  the  soundest 
and  healthiest  practical  teaching.' — I^ondon  Quarterly  Review. 

'  One  of  the  richest  devotional  books  that  we  have  read.' — Primitive 
Methodist  Magazine. 

In  One  Volume,  crown  8vo,  price  5s.,  Third  Edition, 

LIGHT    FROM     THE     CROSS: 

SERMONS  ON  THE  PASSION  OF  OUR  LORD. 

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  GERMAN  OF  A.  THOLUCK,  D.D., 

Professor  of  Theology  iu  the  University  of  Halle. 

'With  no  ordinary  confidence  and  pleasure,  we  commend  these  most  noble, 
solemnizing,  and  touching  discourses.'— British  and  Foreign  Evangelical  Revitw. 


RELIGIOUS  TRACT  &  BOOK  SOCIETY  OF  SCOTLAND, 

13  South  St.  Andrew  Street,  Edinburgh. 

Largest  Stock  of  Juvenile  Books  in  Town,  suitable  for  Prizes  and  Rewards. 

Congregational  and  Sabbath- School  Libraries  supplied  on  Best  Terms. 

Catalogues  on  application. 

GREAT  VARIETY  IN  FRAMED^ fALL TEXTS,  offered  at  Lowest  Prices. 
FAMILY  AND  PULPIT  BIBLES,  in  all  Bindings. 

HYMNALS  AND  PSALTERS,  all  Kinds. 


OUP  SOURCES  of  SUPPLY  are- 
Religious  Tract  Society,  Society  for  Promoting  Christian  Knowledge, 
Book  Society,  Wesleyan  Methodist  Conference  Office,  Sunday-School 
Union,  Church  of  England   Sunday-School  Union,  Monthly  Tract 
Society,  Tract  Depots  of  Stirling  and  Dublin,  etc.  etc. 


The  Committee  invite  Inspection  of  the  Large  and  Varied  Stock  of  BOOKS 
and  TRACTS  exhibited  in  their  extensive  Depository.  It  has  been  carefully 
selected,  and  is  constantly  being  replenished  with  the  Latest  Issues  of  the 
Christian  Press. 

Country  Orders  executed  on  Day  of  Ecccipt. 


All  Orders  to  be  addressed  to 

JOHN   MOLYNEAUX,  Trade  Manager. 

TEXT   BOOKS   FOR    BIBLE   CLASSES. 

Principles  of  Christian  Truth  in  regard  to  Doctrine,  Worship,  and  Polity. 
Extracted  from  the  Holy  Scriptures,  the  Ancient  Creeds,  and  the  Sym 
bolical  Books  of  the  Reformed  Churches.  By  THOMAS  WITHEROW, 
D.D.,  Londonderry.  18mo,  sewed,  price  6d. 

Scriptural  Baptism :  Its  Mode  and  Subjects,  as  opposed  to  the  Views  of 
the  Anabaptists.  By  THOMAS  WITHEROW,  D.D.  Price  6d. 

The  Apostolic  Church,  Which  is  it?  An  Inquiry  at  the  Oracles  of  God  as 
to  whether  any  existing  form  of  Church  Government  is  of  Diviue 
Right.  By  THOMAS  WITHEROW,  D.D.  Price  6d. 

Christian  Evidences.  By  Archibald  Alexander,  D.D.,  Princeton.  Edited 
by  ANDREW  THOMSON,  D.D.,  Edinburgh.  Price  Is. 

Christian  Doctrine :  A  Text  Book  for  Youth.  By  Professor  Macgregor, 
D.D.  Price  Is. 

Bible  History,  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  By  Professor  Kurtz.  Trans 
lated  by  Rev.  ANPREW  MELVILLE,  M.A.  Price  Is. 

The  Shorter  Catechism,  Illustrated  and  Practically  Applied.  By  George 
DONALDSON.  With  introductory  Notice  by  Professor  RAINY.  Price 
Is.  6d. 

Confession  of  Faith,  with  Marginal  References.  Crown  8vo,  sewed, 
price  2d. 

Jesus  Remembered ;  or,  Brief  Hints  on  the  Lord's  Supper.  By  R. 
MACDONALD,  D.D.  Eleventh  Thousand,  18mo,  sewed,  price  2d. 

Plain  Words  to  a  Young  Communicant.  By  J.  W.  Alexander,  D.D.  18mo, 
sewed,  price  3d. 

EDINBURGH:   ANDREW  ELLIOT,  17  PRINCES  STREET. 


I 


\ 


I 


